1 

WRITING 25 – CẬP NHẬT ĐỀ THI IELTS TASK 1 & TASK 2 MỚI NHẤT 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 30/04/2022 

Đề  bài:  The  diagram  below  shows  the  process  of  making  soft  cheese.  Summarise  the 
information  by  selecting  and  reporting  the  main  features  and  make  comparisons  where 
relevant.

Dàn bài 
Mở bài 

Đoạn tổng quát 
(Overview) 

Giới thiệu nội dung chính của sơ đồ 

•  Quy trình được thể hiện qua 5 bước 
•  Bắt đầu từ sữa, kết thúc với thành phẩm soft cheese 

Thân bài 1 

3 bước đầu tiên: 

•  Trộn đều nước cùng sữa tươi 
•  Tiếp tục trộn hỗn hợp ở 5 độ C trong vòng 2 tiếng 
•  Thêm muối, đun nóng tới 35 độ C để hỗn hợp lên men 

Thân bài 2 

2 bước cuối cùng: 

trong 6h 

•  Tăng nhiệt độ lên 100 độ C trong 8h để hỗn hợp bốc hơi. 
Làm nguội xuống 5 độ C trong 6h còn lại. Sử dụng màng 
• 
lọc để thu về sản phẩm và loại bỏ phần nước dư thừa. 

Bài mẫu 

The given flow chart illustrates how soft cheese is made.  

In general, it can be seen that there are five stages in this process, starting with milk blended 
together with water and ending with the final product all set to be consumed.  

In the first stage, milk is mixed well with fresh water. Then, this mixture is ready for the 
second step, which is the refrigerating process. At this stage, milk and water are stored in a 
specific cooling equipment that continues to blend and freezes the mixture at 5 Celsius 
degrees at the same time. After 2 hours, salt is added and the liquid is now brought to the 
fermentation stage where this mixture gets heated up constantly for 6 hours. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Having been completely fermented, this liquid then lets off its steam via evaporation using 
more heat, which is up to 100 Celsius degrees. After an 8-hour evaporation stage, the 
mixture becomes a thick liquid and is put to chill at 5 Celsius degrees for 6 hours. In the final 
stage, wastewater and soft cheese are sorted out via a special filter.  

2 

Các cấu trúc dùng để diễn tả thứ tự 

In the first stage 

• 
•  Having completely fermented 
•  After an 8-hour evaporation stage 
•  Then, this mixture is ready for the second step 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 30/04/2022 

Đề bài: Some people think that young people should be required to do unpaid work helping 
people in the community. Do the advantages outweigh the disadvantages? 

Các đề bài liên quan 

Some people think that all teenagers should be required to do unpaid work in their free time 
to help the local community. They believe this would benefit both the individual teenager and 
society as a whole. Do you agree or disagree?  

• 

It  is  suggested  that  all  the  young  adults  should  undertake  a  period  of  unpaid  work 
helping  people  in  the  community.  Does  it  bring  more  benefits  or  drawbacks  to  the 
community and the young people? 

Phân tích đề 

•  Phạm vi chủ đề: người trẻ nên được yêu cầu làm việc tình nguyện không công 
•  Nhiệm vụ: 

o Đưa ra ưu điểm và nhược điểm của việc này 
o Kết luận ưu điểm hay nhược điểm chiếm ưu thế 

•  Định nghĩa các khái niệm có trong đề: 

o unpaid work: là hình thức lao động không được trả công 

 
 
 
 
Dàn bài 

3 

Các ý tưởng khác có thể sử dụng 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

•  Phần  thưởng  vô  hình:  mối 
quan  hệ  mới,  trải  nghiệm 
sống mới 

•  Không được trả lương dễ khiến người trẻ có thái 
độ  hời  hợt  với  công  việc  →  tạo  thái  độ/hành  vi 
không tốt khi lao động 

Bài mẫu 

It is argued that young adults must get involved in the local community without getting paid. 
While there are several benefits to such activities, these are outweighed by the drawbacks.  
Though young people do not receive any kind of direct remuneration, doing volunteer work 
may help them mentally prepare for the life of an adult. Firstly, teenage volunteers may learn 
to become more responsible. Most people at these ages are still heavily reliant on their parents 
and teachers. Therefore, taking part in community work means they are entering a new work 
environment with little supervision of parents and teachers; in other words, they are given a 
chance to stand on their own. Furthermore, helping other people can make their lives more 
fulfilled. It is true that the need to contribute and be recognized is universal and should not be 
limited to adults, and for teens through community work, this need can be met.  

 
 
 
 
 
4 

However,  the  benefits  appear  less  significant  than  the  drawbacks.  On  the  one  hand,  many 
teenagers are already burned out with schoolwork and homework, which are as demanding as 
a full-time job. If they are obliged to do unpaid work, this can create a negative impression 
that their life is nothing but duties. This suggests that the rest of their time should be spent on 
their hobbies to help them find school-life balance. On the other hand, as students’ time and 
capacity  is  still  limited,  society  only  gains  insignificant  benefit  from  their  contribution  to 
community work. What they can support the community at this point may be just some simple 
paperwork and errands, and two hours of volunteering a week, for instance, is not enough to 
make a change.  

In  conclusion,  though  it  can  benefit  young  adults  to  do  unpaid  community  service  to  some 
extent, this should not be made compulsory for all.  

Từ vựng 

remuneration (n) phần thưởng, sự khen thưởng 

• 
•  heavily reliant: phụ thuộc nhiều 
supervision (n) sự giám sát 
• 
•  burned out: kiệt sức 
• 

school-life balance: cân bằng giữa trường học và cuộc sống 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 23/04/2022 

The chart below shows the percentage of the population in the UK who consumed the 
recommended daily amount of fruit and vegetables in 2002, 2006 and 
2010.

Dàn bài chi tiết 

Mở bài 

Giới thiệu nội dung chính của biểu đồ 

Đoạn tổng quát 
(Overview) 

•  Số liệu của tất cả các nhóm tăng 
•  Số liệu của Women cao nhất, trong khi số liệu của Children 

Thân bài 1 

Mô tả số liệu của năm đầu tiên (2002) 

thấp nhất  

 
 
 
 
 
5 

•  ¼ số Women ăn lượng rau và trái cây gợi ý 
•  Số liệu của Men: 22%, gấp đôi số liệu của Children 

Thân bài 2 

Mô tả số liệu của hai năm sau (2006 và 2010) 

•  Năm 2006: tất cả các số liệu tăng và đạt đỉnh, số liệu 

Women cao nhất ở mức hơn 30%. 

•  Năm 2010: Tất cả số liệu của Women, Men và Children giảm 

(lần lượt giảm xuống 27%, 25% và 14%). 

Bài mẫu 

The bar chart illustrates the percentages of males, females and children in the UK consuming 
the recommended daily amount of fruit and vegetables, in three separate years (2002, 2006 
and 2010). 

Overall, the proportion of all groups eating fruit and vegetables increased over the period 
shown. Also, while women had a tendency to consume these foods the most, the opposite 
was true for children. 

As can be seen from the chart, in 2002, approximately a quarter of females in the UK ate the 
recommended amount of fruit and vegetables. This was followed by nearly 22% of males 
consuming these foods daily, which was two times higher than that of children. 

Over the following eight years, the figures for all groups increased to reach peaks in 2006 in 
which the figure for women was highest at just over 30%. By 2010, however, the percentage 
of females, males and children eating fruit and vegetables had decreased slightly to 27%, 
24% and 14% respectively. 

Các cấu trúc dùng để diễn tả sự thay đổi số liệu: 

•  The figures for all groups increased to reach peaks in 2006. 
•  By 2010, however, the percentage of females, males and children eating fruit and 

vegetables had decreased slightly to 27%, 24% and 14% respectively. 

Các cấu trúc miêu tả số liệu 

•  This was followed by nearly 22% of males consuming these foods daily, which was 

two times higher than that of children. 

•  ….. in 2006 in which the figure for women was highest at just over 30%. 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 23/04/2022 

Đề bài: Young people today mostly learn by reading books or watching movies, rather than 
real-life experiences. To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

Các đề bài liên quan 

•  Nowadays, more and more children are using digital platforms as their regular 

learning resources. Why? Is this a better way of learning? 

•  Some people think that children should gather knowledge via their own experience. 
Others believe that books and movies have better educational outcomes. Discuss 
both views and give your opinion. 

Phân tích đề 

•  Phạm vi chủ đề: Việc học của trẻ thông qua các nền tảng. 
•  Nhiệm vụ: Bày tỏ nhận định cá nhân (đồng ý, không đồng ý). 
•  Định nghĩa các khái niệm trong đề: real-life experience: trải nghiệm thực tế. 

 
 
 
 
6 

Các ý tưởng khác có thể sử dụng 
Disagree 

•  Cuộc sống hiện đại cung cấp môi trường an toàn hơn để khám phá. 
•  Điều kiện sống hiện đại có nhiều chuyến đi và dịch vụ cho trẻ trải nghiệm. 

Bài mẫu 

These days, most children prefer acquiring knowledge via printed work and films to learning 
from self-experience. In my opinion, I totally agree with this notion. 

On the one hand, the hustle and bustle of daily life has restrained people from 
undergoing hands-on affairs. Due to the rapid development of modern society, only by 
studying with high intensity could young minds catch up with this advancement. As gaining 
personal experience requires much time, children have to accumulate knowledge via books 
and other digital platforms. In addition, after COVID-19 pandemic, some young people have 
become less proactive and no longer favor outdoor trips. Besides, in order to meet the 
modern living standard, adults now are snowed under with their heavy workloads. This could 
also reduce children's hands-on experience as their parents cannot offer vacations and other 
exploring trips. 

On the other hand, most young people favor studying by books and movies due to their 
reasonable cost and great outcome. Nowadays, educational trips have become more and 
more costly. Therefore, people consider printed work and films as economical and accessible 
learning resources. Additionally, paperbacks now are well-equipped with valuable content and 
lively illustration, and various TV shows are rated with high educational value, such as Peppa 
Pig and Sesame Street. As a result, children could indirectly explore the outside world via 
colorful cartoons without worries about outer risks. 

 
 
 
 
7 

In conclusion, due to the hectic modern lifestyle together with the efficiency of book-learning 
and movies, young minds still opt for printed works and other digital platforms as their way 
of studying.  

Từ vựng 

•  Printed work: Các sản phẩm in ấn: sách báo, tranh ảnh… 
•  Hands-on affair: Tình huống thực tế 
•  Digital platform: Nền tảng số 
•  Be snowed under with sth: Bận rộn với…Hands-on experience: Kinh nghiệm thực tế 
•  Economical (adj): Có tính kinh tế, chi phí hợp lý 
•  Opt for sth: Yêu thích, lựa chọn cái gì đó… 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 21/04/2022 

The graph shows the amount of fruit produced in four countries (France, Spain, Germany, 
Turkey) from 1970 to 2010. 

Dàn bài chi tiết 
Mở bài 

Đoạn tổng quát 
(Overview) 

Giới thiệu nội dung chính của biểu đồ 

•  Số liệu của Turkey có xu hướng tăng đều trong giai đoạn, 
trong khi đó số liệu của Germany có xu hướng giảm dần. 

•  Số liệu của Spain luôn giữ vị trí cao nhất. 

Thân bài 1 

Mô tả số liệu của Spain và Germany 

•  Spain có sản lượng cao nhất trong giai đoạn 1970. Trong khi 

đó Germany chỉ đạt mức 2,5 triệu tấn. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

•  Vào năm 1980, Spain đạt 6 triệu tấn - mức cao nhất. Sau đó 

giảm dần và chạm đáy ở mức 5 triệu tấn 

•  Năm 1990, Germany đạt mức thấp nhất tại 1,5 triệu tấn. Số 

liệu duy trì đến năm 2000 sau đó giảm nhẹ khoảng 0,25 triệu 
tấn vào 2010. 

Thân bài 2 

Mô tả số liệu của Turkey và France 

•  Năm 1970, số liệu của France đạt mức thấp nhất trong giai 

đoạn.  

•  Số liệu của France giảm vào năm 2000, trước khi tăng mạnh và 

đạt mức cao nhất vào năm 2010. 

•  Turkey tăng đều và đạt khoảng 3,5 triệu tấn vào cuối giai 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

đoạn. 

The given line graph demonstrates fruit production in 4 countries: France, Spain, Germany 
and Turkey between 1970 and 2010. 

Overall, it can be seen that the amount of fruit produced in Turkey underwent a gradual 
increase during the period, while the opposite was true for Germany. In addition, the figure 
for Spain was always highest from 1970 to 2010. 

Spain supplied the most fruit (5,5 million tonnes) in 1970, whereas only 2,5 million tonnes of 
fruit were made in Germany. In 1980, fruit production in Spain rose to 6 million tonnes, 
which was the highest number during the period. This figure then gradually decreased and 
hit its bottom at 5 million tonnes. In 1990, fruit production in Germany hit the lowest point at 
1,5 million tonnes, then remained stable for 10 years before slightly dropping for 0,25 million 
tonnes in 2010. 

In 1970, the amount of fruit made in France was the lowest number during the period. Fruit 
production in France reduced in 2000 before significantly jumping to nearly 3 million tonnes 
at the end of the period. During the period, fruit manufacture in Turkey gradually increased 
and reached 3,5 million tonnes in 2010. 

Cấu trúc câu 

• 

• 

In 1980, fruit production in Spain rose to 6 million tonnes, which was the highest 
number during the period. 
In 1990, fruit production in Germany hit the lowest point at 1,5 million tonnes, 
then remained stable for 10 years before slightly dropping for 0,25 million tonnes in 
2010. 

•  During the period, fruit manufacture in Turkey gradually increased and reached 3,5 

million tonnes in 2010. 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 21/04/2022 

Some people argue that parents of children who break the law should be punished in some 
way, because they are responsible for their children’s actions. 

To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

Các đề bài liên quan 

 
 
 
 
9 

•  The best way to reduce youth crimes is to educate their parents with parental skills. 

• 

To what extent do you agree or disagree? 
In some countries, a high proportion of criminal acts are committed by teenagers. Why 
has this happened? What can be done to deal with this? 

Phân tích đề 

•  Phạm vi chủ đề: khi trẻ em phạm tội, cha mẹ nên bị phạt  
•  Nhiệm vụ: Bày tỏ quan điểm đối với vấn đề trên 
•  Định nghĩa các khái niệm có trong đề: 

o Children who break the law: trẻ em phạm pháp 
o Parents  are  responsible  for  their  children’s  action:  cha  mẹ  chịu  trách  nhiệm 

cho hành động của con cái 

o Parents should be punished: cha mẹ nên bị phạt  

Dàn bài 

Các ý tưởng nếu không đồng ý với quan điểm đề bài có thể sử dụng: Phạm tội do gen duy 
truyền không phải vấn đề cha mẹ có thể kiểm soát được → Cha mẹ không nên phải chịu trách 
nhiệm. 

Bài mẫu 

It is argued that parents should be responsible or even punished for crimes committed by 
their children. While juvenile delinquency may be due to parents’ failure in raising their 
children, I believe that teenage lawbreakers should take all accountability for their offenses.  

More often than not, children’s anti-social behaviors could be traced back to a dysfunctional 
family with abusive parents, divorced parents or parents who put too much academic 
pressure on their children. These generally share one feature in common which is a lack of 
care toward children’s emotions. Due to this unhappy childhood, children become more 

 
 
10 

vulnerable to cognitive distortion; they tend to think more negatively, feel worthless, and 
consider social offenses a way to prove their worth to the world. Indeed, statistics agree that 
many juvenile offenders have experienced emotional crises due to their broken families, 
which leads to their anti-social attitudes. As several roots of evils committed by children are 
from parents’ failure to raise their kids with love, parents should be partly accountable for 
their children’s illegal behaviors. 

Nevertheless, I insist that the lawbreakers themselves, not their parents, should be punished 
to ensure a justice system based on fairness and criminal deterrence. Firstly, it is unjust for 
offenders to escape legal punishment and continue their normal lives despite harming 
society. Punishment is to let them understand the price for their actions, and could vary, 
depending on the seriousness of the behavior. Secondly, the threat of being punished would 
deter the risk of other teenages’ committing anti-social behaviors. This will make society a 
safer and more peaceful place. 

In conclusion, although parents play a part in their children’s wrongdoings, they should not 
take major or all responsibility for that. It is suggested to punish juvenile lawbreakers as a 
way to ensure a just legal system and alleviate the risk of potential criminals. 

juvenile delinquency: tội phạm thanh thiếu niên 
lawbreakers: kẻ phạm pháp 
take all accountability for: chịu toàn bộ trách nhiệm cho 
anti-social behaviors: các hành vi chống đối xã hội 

• 
• 
• 
• 
•  dysfunctional family: gia đình bất hòa 
• 
• 
• 
•  unjust (adj) bất công 
• 

cognitive distortion: lối suy nghĩ méo mó 
justice system: hệ thống luật pháp 
criminal deterrence: răn đe tội phạm 

alleviate the risk of potential crimes: giảm nguy cơ phạm tội  

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 09/04/2022 

Đề bài: The line graph shows the global demand of different textile from 1980-2015 

 
 
 
 
11 

Dàn bài 
Mở bài 
Đoạn 
(Overview) 

tổng 

Giới thiệu nội dung chính của biểu đồ đường 

quát 

•  3 đường có xu hướng tăng, 1 đường giảm (Wool) 
•  Polyester tăng mạnh nhất 

Thân bài 1 

Mô tả số liệu của Polyester và Cotton 

•  Cotton: Tăng đều → Chạm đỉnh 
•  Polyester:  Tăng  đều,  mạnh  →  Tăng  nhanh,  mạnh  →  Chạm 

đỉnh 

Thân bài 2 

Mô tả số liệu của Cellulosic và Wool 

•  Cellulosic: Giảm nhẹ → Tăng nhẹ 
•  Wool: Tăng nhẹ → Giảm → Giảm đều 

Bài mẫu 

The line chart illustrates total textile demand over the globe between 1980 and 2015. 

Overall, the demand for polyester, cotton, and cellulosic textiles rose over the period shown, 
while the opposite was true for wool. Among them, polyester saw the most significant growth.  

In 1980, the cotton demand was more than 10 million tons, making it the most popular fabric, 
and had increased steadily to nearly 30 million tons by 2000. After declining to about 20 million 
tons during this period, it continued to rise gradually, peaking at over 30 million tons in 2015. 
From  1980  to  1995,  the  demand  for  polyester  also witnessed  a  steady  increase,  yet  more 
significant than cotton, from around 5 to 20 million tons. After 1995, it rose dramatically and 
reached its peak at nearly 70 million tons in 2015. 

In 1980, the demands for cellulosic and wool were almost the same, at around 5 million tons 
each. After that, they followed opposite patterns at a similar pace. From 1980 to 2000, while 
the figure for cellulosic dropped slightly then increased to about 10 million tons, that for wool 
increased then declined to almost no demand.  

 
 
 
12 

Các cấu trúc dùng để diễn tả số liệu/vị trí/thứ tự 
•  Polyester saw the most significant growth 
•  After declining to about 20 million tons during this period, it continued to rise gradually, 

peaking at over 30 million tons in 2015. 
From 1980 to 1995, the demand for polyester also witnessed a steady increase 

• 
•  After that, they followed opposite patterns at a similar pace. 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 09/04/2022 

Đề bài: Although there is a lot of translation software available, learning a language could still 
be advantageous. To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

Các đề bài liên quan 

•  Some people say that the only reason for learning a foreign language is in order to 

travel to or work in a foreign country. Others say that these are not the only reasons 
why someone should learn a foreign language. Discuss both views and give your own 
opinion. 

•  Studying the English language in an English-speaking country is the best but not the 

only way to learn language. Do you agree or disagree? 

Phân tích đề 

•  Phạm vi chủ đề: Việc học ngoại ngữ và sử dụng các phần mềm dịch thuật. 
•  Nhiệm vụ: Đưa ra quan điểm cá nhân đối với vấn đề được cho. 
•  Định nghĩa các khái niệm có trong đề:  

o Translation software: Phần mềm dịch thuật 
o Learning a language: Học một ngôn ngữ 

Dàn bài 

Các ý tưởng khác có thể sử dụng 

Disagree 

 
 
 
 
 
13 

•  Nhiều người gặp khó khăn trong việc học và tiếp thu một ngôn ngữ mới, các trình 

phiên dịch là công cụ đắc lực. 

•  Sử dụng công cụ phiên dịch cho thấy con người đang bắt kịp với sự phát triển của 

công nghệ tiến bộ. 

•  Việc học ngoại ngữ yêu cầu nhiều yếu tố, các phần mềm dịch thuật giúp con người 

tiết kiệm chi phí và thời gian. 

Bài mẫu 

In today's modern world, technology has made great progress, resulting in numerous 
translation tools; however, several individuals still believe that studying a new language still 
appears to be of great importance. From my perspective, I absolutely agree with this 
viewpoint. 

On the one hand, learning a foreign language could support the development of inner brain 
functions. When switching between different languages, more neurons are put to work as the 
brain needs to detect new phrasing then convert it back to one's mother tongue. Such 
complicated lexical analysis being operated regularly can aid neurological development, 
especially in children. In fact, recent studies have shown that multilingual people appear to 
have higher intellectual capacity than the monolingual. Additionally, mastering a new 
language requires a great amount of time and effort, which assists the advancement of 
cognitive skills, promotes memory capacity and enhances perseverance. This can be seen as 
a long-term benefit owing to the necessity of these traits in different aspects of life. 

On the other hand, acquiring a language could also bring about practical advantages in both 
private and professional life. Firstly, due to the inconsistent accuracy of common translation 
programs, along with costly premium softwares, mastering a language via self-study perhaps 
is the most viable option to individuals with limited budgets. In urgent situations without 
access to the Internet and portable devices, travelers having a grasp of the foreign tongue 
can converse with the locals, and therefore receive support on time. Besides, assimilating a 
new language demands considerable practice, hence verbal communication skills and self-
assurance. As these are conducive key attributes of a competent employee, career prospects 
of the multilingual could be promoted. 

In conclusion, despite the expansion of translation applications, studying new languages still 
holds a significant role because this supports brain development and leads to numerous 
benefits in real-life situations.   

Từ vựng 

Limited budget: Kinh phí hạn hẹp 

Lexical analysis: Phân tích ngôn ngữ 

•  Mother tongue: Ngôn ngữ mẹ đẻ 
• 
•  Multilingual (adj): Có khả năng nói đa ngôn ngữ 
•  Monolingual (adj): Có khả năng nói một ngôn ngữ 
• 
•  Having a grasp of: Hiểu rõ, có khả năng vận dụng 
•  Self-assurance (n): Tự tin vào bản thân 
•  Assimilate (v): Hiểu rõ, tiếp thu kiến thức 
•  Verbal communication skill: Kỹ năng giao tiếp bằng lời nói 
•  Conducive key attribute: Thành tố quan trọng 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 03/03/2022 

 
 
 
 
The chart shows the percentage of people who accessed news from 4 sources from 1995 and 
projection to 2025 

14 

Dàn bài chi tiết 
Mở bài 

Đoạn tổng quát 
(Overview) 

Giới thiệu nội dung chính của bảng số liệu 

•  Số liệu của internet thì tăng và các số liệu còn lại thì giảm 

trong quá khứ 

•  Các xu hướng này có thể sẽ tiếp tục trong tương lai. 

Thân bài 1 

Mô tả số liệu của TV, radio và newspaper (các số liệu giảm) 

•  Số liệu TV là 40% ở năm 1995, giảm còn 55% vào năm 2020 

dù có tăng nhẹ ở năm 2010. Số liệu này sẽ kết thúc ở 
khoảng 50% vào năm 2025. 

•  Số liệu của newsapper và radio giảm như nhau, bắt đầu 55% 
và giảm còn 30% vào năm 2020. Số liệu của newspaper sẽ 
kết thúc vào khoảng 30% và radio khoảng 23%. 

Thân bài 2 

Mô tả số liệu của internet (số liệu tăng) 

•  Xuất hiện ở năm 1995 và thu hút tỉ lệ ít người vào năm 2000 
•  Trở nên phổ biến hơn và thu hút 40% người năm 2020 
•  Kết thúc ở 60%, khiến internet trở nên phổ biến nhất. 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

The  chart  illustrates  the  proportion  of  people  using  different  methods  to  access  news  from 
1995 and the prediction to 2025. 

Overall, while the internet gained more popularity during the given period, the opposite was 
true for the remaining figures. These trends are likely to continue in the future. 

The percentage of people who watched news programs on TV was nearly 70% in 1995. The 
figure then decreased gradually to 55% in 2020, despite a slight rise of 3% in 2010. It is then 

 
 
 
 
15 

likely to finish at exactly 50% in 2025. Additionally, starting at about 55%, the figures for 
newspapers and radios experienced similar downward trends, declining to about 30% in 
2020. The expectation is that approximately 30% of people will use newspapers, and roughly 
23% will listen to the radio to get news. 

Despite only becoming available in 1995 and attracting only a small proportion of people in 
2000, the internet quickly became prevalent in the next 20 years, with 40% of people using 
it. The figure is predicted to increase to about 55% in 2025, overcoming newspapers to 
become the most common method to access news in 2025. 

Các cấu trúc có thể sử dụng để diễn đạt các số liệu trong bài trong thời gian quá 
khứ 

•  The percentage of people who watched news programs on TV was nearly 70% in 1995. 
•  The figures for newspapers and radios experienced similar downward trends, declining 

to about 30% in 2020 

•  The internet quickly became prevalent in the next 20 years, with 40% of people using 

it.  

Các cấu trúc có thể sử dụng để diễn đạt các số liệu trong bài trong thời gian tương 
lai 

•  The expectation is that approximately 30% of people will use newspapers, and roughly 

23% will listen to the radio to get news. 

•  The figure is likely to increase to about 55% in 2025. 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 03/03/2022 

Some people think scientific research should focus on solving world health problems. Others 
think that there are more important issues.  Discuss both views and give your opinion. 

Các đề bài liên quan 

•  Research into medical treatments are essential to improve health and fight disease. 
Who  do  you  think  should  fund  this  research:  individuals,  private  companies  or 
governments? 
 "Prevention is better than cure." Out of a country's health budget, a large proportion 
should be diverted from treatment to spending on health education and preventative 
measures. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement? 

• 

•  Some  people  say  that  the  government  should  give  priority  to  health  care  whereas 
others  say  they  should  spend  on  other  important  priorities.  Discuss  both  views  and 
give your opinion. 

Phân tích đề 

Phạm vi chủ đề: Nghiên cứu khoa học, giải quyết các vấn đề sức khỏe, các vấn đề khác 

Nhiệm vụ: Bàn luận về cả 2 phía và đưa ra ý kiến 

•  Giải thích tại sao nghiên cứu khoa học để giải quyết các vấn đề sức khỏe quan trọng 
•  Giải thích tại có những vấn đề khác cũng cần khoa học nghiên cứu 
•  So sánh sự quan trọng của cả hai  

Định nghĩa các khái niệm có trong đề: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 

scientific research: nghiên cứu khoa học 
focus on: tập trung vào  
solve world health problems: giải quyết các vấn đề về sức khỏe trên thế giới  

16 

 
 
Dàn bài chi tiết 

17 

 
 
 
18 

Các ý tưởng khác có thể sử dụng 

Nên nghiên cứu vấn đề sức khỏe 

Nên nghiên cứu những vấn đề khác 

Khi nghiên cứu giải quyết được những vấn đề 
về sức khỏe, nhiều mặt khác của con người 
sẽ được cải thiện. Khi không có sức khoẻ, 
con người không thể làm được việc gì khác.  

Nghiên cứu về công nghệ có thể giúp cho tất 
cả những lĩnh vực khác. Ví dụ: y học phát triển 
phần lớn nhờ vào công nghệ → nghiên cứu, 
chẩn đoán, chữa trị tốt hơn nhờ công nghệ.  

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

Some people think scientific research should focus on solving world health problems. Others 
think that there are more important issues.  Discuss both views and give your opinion. 

While some people believe that science should place emphasis on addressing health issues, 
opponents suggest that other problems should be prioritized. As I believe the prime mission 
of research is to enhance human welfare, studying other issues besides health challenges can 
also contribute to this. 

On the one hand, it is reasonable for science to attach importance to dealing with health 
concerns because they are closely related to human lives. If scientists could dedicate more 
time and effort to studying treatments for many fatal diseases, such as cancer, they could be 
entirely treated or prevented, and billions of people’s lives could be saved. An example of this 
is the case of the COVID-19 pandemic, in which millions of people lost their lives, and the 
number could have been even larger if research for COVID vaccines and treatments had not 
been the top priority of many governments.  

However, other areas such as environmental and economic issues should not be neglected 
because they are, in many ways, determinants of health issues as well. Regarding the 
environment, if humans had carried out more research to find solutions to pollution, loss of 
biodiversity, or deforestation, many people's health or even lives could have not been at risk. 
There are also economic problems like poverty or inflation that affect many aspects of well-
being, including poor living conditions, healthcare accessibility, and resources for health 
promotion. Hence, if poverty can be tackled by intensive study, it may be a preemptive 
measure to ensure public health. Thus, resolving threats to wellness requires a combination 
of research in different fields. 

All things considered, although health research can help save lives, there may be issues in 
other areas that warrant scientific attention, like environmental and economic ones, as they 
can also have an influence on human flourishing.  

Vocabulary 

1.  place (great) emphasis on/ put (great) emphasis on: đặt trọng tâm vào  
2.  human welfare: phúc lợi con người  
3.  dedicate time and effort to something: dành nhiều thời gian và nỗ lực hơn cho cái gì 

đó 
fatal diseases: những bệnh hiểm nghèo  

4. 
5.  top priority: ưu tiên hàng đầu  
6.  Determinant (n):  yếu tố quyết định  
7.  poor living conditions: điều kiện sống kém, tệ hại  
8.  a preemptive measure: một biện pháp phủ đầu 
9.  carry out research: thực hiện nghiên cứu  
10.  loss of biodiversity: sự mất đa dạng sinh học  

 
 
 
 
 
 
19 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 26/02/2022 

The bar chart shows the percentage of school children learning to play different musical 
instrument in 2005, 2010, 2015. 

Dàn bài chi tiết 

Mở bài 

•  Giới thiệu nội dung chính của bảng số liệu 

Đoạn tổng quát (Overview) 

•  Đến năm 2015, phần trăm người học 4 dụng cụ đều tăng trừ violin 
•  Guitar và Piano là những dụng cụ được chọn nhiều nhất trong 3 mốc thời gian, và 

năm 2015, 2 dụng cụ này được chọn nhiều hơn nhiều so với drum & violin 

Thân bài 1 

•  Mô tả số liệu của năm 2005 và 2010 của 4 dụng cụ 
•  Năm 2005, người học các dụng cụ ở khoảng 10%, trống thì 5% 
•  Năm 2010, khoảng 20% học sinh học guitar và piano, phần trăm của trống giữ 

nguyên, của violin giảm nhẹ 

 
 
 
 
20 

Thân bài 2 

•  Mô tả số liệu của năm 2015 của 4 dụng cụ 
•  Phần trăm học sinh học guitar và piano tăng 
•  Phần trăm của trống tăng nhẹ, của violin giảm nhẹ 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

The bar chart compares the percentages of students learning to play four kinds of musical 
instruments in three different years; 2005, 2010, and 2015.  

In general, the instruments in the study were being learnt by far more students in 2015 than 
in the previous years, with the exception of the violin. Furthermore, the guitar and the piano 
remained the most popular instruments to learn in all surveyed years. 

In 2005, approximately 11% of school children were learning to play the guitar, the piano, and 
the violin, while only 5% of students were learning to play the drums. By 2010, the guitar and 
piano had almost doubled in popularity, with about 20% and 18% of students learning to play 
them. In the same year, the proportion of school kids learning to play the drums stayed the 
same, while the percentage of those learning the violin decreased marginally.  

In 2015, the percentage of school children learning the guitar saw an increase of approximately 
10%,  while  that  of  piano  learners more  than  doubled to  reach  approximately  40%. 
Furthermore, although the percentage of children learning the drums increased slightly to 8%, 
there was a moderate decrease in the figures for the violin, at only 5%.  

Các cấu trúc có thể sử dụng để diễn đạt các số liệu trong bài 

In 2005, approximately 11% of school children were learning to play the guitar 

• 
•  …, while only 5% of students were learning to play the drums. 
• 

In the same year, the proportion of school kids learning to play the drums stayed the 
same 

•  Although the percentage of children learning the drums increased slightly to 8%, there 

was a moderate decrease in the figures for the violin, at only 5%. 
a moderate decrease in the figures for 

• 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 26/02/2022 

Some people say that too much time and resources are spent on the protection of wild 
animals and birds. To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

Các đề bài liên quan 

•  Wild  animals  have  no  place  in  the  21st  century,  so  protecting  them  is  a  waste  of 

resources. To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

•  Some people think that a huge amount of time and money is spent on the protection 
of wild animals and that this money could be better spent on the human population. 
To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion? 

Phân tích đề 

Phạm vi chủ đề: bảo vệ động vật hoang dã 

Nhiệm vụ:  

•  Bày tỏ quan điểm đồng tình hay phản đối 
•  Xây dựng luận điểm, luận cứ để chứng minh quan điểm trên 

 
 
21 

Định nghĩa các khái niệm có trong đề: 

too much time and resources spent: dành quá nhiều thời gian và tài nguyên 
• 
•  protection of wild animals and birds: việc bảo vệ động vật và chim hoang dã 

Sơ đồ hệ thống ý tưởng: 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

Some  people  argue  that  protecting  wild  animals  and  birds  is  a  waste  of  time  and  money.  I 
completely disagree with this point of view. 

Many current  practices involving  the  use  of  animals  illustrate  that  governments  have  not 
invested enough time in the issue of animal welfare. For example, lawmakers have banned the 
use of wild and exotic animals for entertainment purposes, yet wild animals are still kept  in 
captivity for  circuses.  This inconsistency between  law-making  and law  enforcement suggests 
that the issue is not being taken seriously enough by those in power. Furthermore, it seems 
that an  educational  approach is  unlikely  to  change  people’s  awareness  about  the  issue.  For 
many years, people have underestimated the role of wild animals, and many today still hold a 
belief that wild animal products have exceptional powers. To re-educate such people requires 
patience and consistency. 

 
 
 
22 

In  addition  to  this,  resources  spent  on wildlife  protection are  still  limited.  Many  authorities 
believe that wild animal and bird conservation is only of minor importance, and human welfare 
is far more of a priority. This is why governments are not willing to allocate large amounts of 
funds  and  resources  to the  conservation  of wild  animals,  which  makes  it  difficult  for 
organisations that are actually trying to make a difference. For instance, in Vietnam, we do not 
see  any long-lasting bird  conservation  campaigns  due  to a  lack  of  funding from  the 
government,  and  it  is non-governmental  organizations that  currently raise  the  funds to  take 
care of existing wild birds. 

In conclusion, while there is some time and resources spent on wild animal and bird protection, 
I believe that far more resources are needed to achieve that ultimate goal. 

Vocabulary 

current practice: các biện pháp thi hành hiện thời 
animal welfare: phúc lợi động vật 
lawmaker (n) nhà lập pháp 

• 
• 
• 
•  ban the use of: cấm việc sử dụng 
kept  in captivity: bị giam cầm 
• 
Inconsistency (n) sự thiếu nhất quán 
• 
taken seriously: được coi trọng 
• 
those in power: những người nắm quyền 
• 
an educational approach: cách tiếp cận giáo dục 
• 
•  Underestimate (v) đánh giá thấp 
•  hold a belief: giữ niềm tin 
•  wildlife protection: bảo vệ động vật hoang dã 
•  of minor importance: thứ yếu, không quan trọng 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  non-governmental organizations (n) các tổ chức phi chính phủ 
• 

are not willing to: không sẵn lòng làm gì 
the conservation of: việc bảo tồn cái gì 
to make a difference: tạo ra thay đổi 
Long-lasting (a) lâu dài 
a lack of funding: thiếu quỹ trợ cấp 

raise the funds: gây quỹ 

Đề task 2 ngày 17/02/2022 

Some people think that the government should strictly control the supply of fresh water, 
while others think we can use as much water as we want. Discuss both views and give your 
opinion. 

Dàn bài 

 
 
 
 
 
23 

Bài mẫu 

Water  scarcity  has  become  a  major  problem  in  the  modern  day,  which poses  the  question 
of whether people should still have free access to fresh water. Although some people argue 
that  it  is  their  right  to  use  water  as  they  choose,  I  believe  it  is  more  beneficial  if  there  are 
restrictions on water use. 

On the one hand, proponents of the idea that people should be able to freely use water often 
state  several  reasons.  Firstly,  it  is  not  always  people's  fault  that  water  is  wasted.  In  some 
countries, bureaucracy,  mismanagement 
factors 
that jeopardize water supply. Therefore, it is unjustifiable to force people into saving resources 
that they do not waste in the first place. Secondly, it is the responsibility of the state to ensure 
that its citizens have access to fresh water. The government should use taxpayers' money to 
promote sustainable water management and improve the sewage system, allowing them to 
supply  and  recycle  water  in  a  way  that  meets  current  needs  without  affecting  future 
generations. 

corruption are 

the  main 

and 

On  the  other  hand,  other  people  believe  that  water  shortages  will  become  more  severe 
without government intervention. A large number of people still think that fresh water is an 
unlimited natural resource. Setting maximum limits for water consumption or punishing those 
who overuse water would surely raise people's awareness of the dire consequences of abusing 
water  resources,  thereby  discouraging  them  from  misusing  water.  In  addition,  only  the 
government has a deep understanding of its current water situation. Therefore, only they can 

 
 
 
24 

take action accordingly to prevent drought and other emergencies that water shortages can 
cause. 

In conclusion, although household water use might not be the main culprit of water shortages, 
I firmly believe that the government should control and regulate the water supply in order to 
encourage efficient water use and protect the country from disaster. 

Từ vựng 

1.  poses the question of something: đặt ra câu hỏi về điều gì đó: 
2.  bureaucracy, mismanagement and corruption: quan liêu, quản lý yếu kém và tham 

nhũng 
jeopardize: gây nguy hiểm 
force somebody into doing something: buộc ai đó làm điều gì đó 

3. 
4. 
5.  have access to something: có quyền truy cập vào một cái gì đó 
6.  government intervention: sự can thiệp của chính phủ 
7.  an unlimited natural resource: một nguồn tài nguyên thiên nhiên không giới hạn 
8.  raise people's awareness of the dire consequences of something: nâng cao nhận thức 

của mọi người về hậu quả nghiêm trọng của một cái gì đó 

9.  has a deep understanding of something: hiểu biết sâu sắc về điều gì đó 
10.  the main culprit of something: thủ phạm chính của một cái gì đó 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 12/02/2022 

The picture below shows the difference in the layout of the conference centre in 2010 and 
2025. 

The picture below shows the difference in the layout of the conference centre in 2010 and 
2025.The maps illustrate a conference centre in 2010 and what it is proposed to look like in 
2025. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
25 

Overall, there are many changes proposed to take place by 2025, including the addition of 
several new rooms and facilities, along with the renovation of several existing facilities. 

In 2010, there were two adjoining rooms located next to the reception area and hall. By 
2025, the rooms are to remain intact, however both the reception area and hall will have 
been expanded. There will also be a new 20 room residence facility located beside the hall. 
To make way for these changes, the car park will be reduced in size and moved to a different 
area. 

Several other new facilities are proposed to be built in the large garden area opposite the 
rooms and halls. These new facilities include an IT centre, a canteen and kitchen, two 
meeting rooms, a game room, and a music room. 

Band điểm ước lượng 

TR: 8 CC: 9 LR: 8 GRA: 8 Overall: 8.0 

Để diễn đạt các vị trí trong bài, người viết có thể sử dụng những cấu trúc sau: 

•  There were two adjoining rooms located next to the reception area and hall. 
•  Several other new facilities are proposed to be built in the large garden area. 
•  The car park will be reduced in size and moved to a different area 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 12/02/2022 

Đề bài: More and more people are choosing to eat healthy food and exercise regularly. Why? 
What can we do to encourage this? 

Dàn bài 

 
 
26 

Bài mẫu 

The  advancement  of  technology,  medicine,  and  science  has  created  a  major  shift in  many 
people's  lifestyles  these  days,  and  there  is  now a  greater  emphasis  on disease  prevention. 
People are starting to adopt healthier ways of living, including a more health-conscious diet 
and frequent exercise. This essay will outline the reasons behind this trend and possible ways 
to promote it further.  

The main cause of this new trend may stem from the influence of the media and the availability 
and accessibility of healthier options. Firstly, there are a plethora of channels, websites, vlogs, 
and social media pages about healthy living, and the mainstream media are now promoting 
more and more information regarding healthy diets and active lifestyles. Because the media 
has always been a major influence on people's behavior, this can have a significant impact on 
them.  The  second  reason  lies  in  the  easier  access  to  healthy  options.  Thanks  to  the 
development  of  agriculture  and  infrastructure,  stores  and  supermarkets  are  now  offering  a 
much  wider  range  of  food  products  with  high nutritional  value.  Besides,  more  sport  and 
exercise facilities are springing up in urban areas, making it easier than ever for people to stay 
physically active. 

To  help  support  this  development,  there  are  several  issues  that  can  be  addressed  by  the 
government. Firstly, despite the availability of healthier food products, some are only accessible 
at high prices, making it difficult for low-income families to choose healthier options. Therefore, 

 
 
 
27 

the  prices  of  these  products  need  to  be  decreased  in  order  to  make  them  more universally 
attainable.  Secondly,  governments  should  allocate  more  funding  to  free  sport  and  exercise 
facilities. This can create more opportunities for people to engage in physical activities through 
the promotion of different sports. Some remote areas nowadays still experience a severe lack 
of facilities and equipment for people to participate in sport and exercise. 

In  conclusion,  there  are  two  reasons  explaining  why  people  are  becoming  more  health-
conscious and the governments can further encourage this trend by assisting in the accessibility 
of healthy food ,and sport and exercise facilities. 

Từ vựng: 

1.  (put/ place) greater emphasis on (something): đặt nặng cái gì đó hơn, chú trọng cái 

gì đó hơn 

2.  the availability and accessibility of (something):  sự sẵn có và có thể tiếp cận được của  
3.  disease prevention: ngăn ngừa bệnh 
4.  the plethora of: lượng quá lớn 
5.  the mainstream media: truyền thông chính thống  
6.  active lifestyle: lối sống năng động 
7.  nutritional value: giá trị dinh dưỡng  
8.  stay physically active: duy trì hoạt động thể chất  
9.  universally attainable/accessible (adj): mọi người đều có thể tiếp cận, sử dụng, có được 
10.  engage in physical activities: tham gia vào các hoạt động thể chất 
11.  a severe lack of (something): sự thiếu trầm trọng của  

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 20/01/2022 

The plans show how a coastal land has developed into a coastal park 

 
 
 
 
 
 
28 

Dàn bài chi tiết 

Đoạn tổng quát 

(Overview) 

• 
•  Khu đất phía trước vách đá đã được nâng cấp với một số cơ sở vật chất cho công 

viên 

•  Bãi biển phía sau được tiếp cận dễ hơn. 

Thân bài 1 

•  Mô tả bản đề trước sự thay đổi 
•  Có những chuồng trại ở nhánh đường phụ, ở khu vực trung tâm của vùng đất này. 

 
 
 
29 

•  Bên trái của những công trình này là đất hoang và nơi trú ẩn của động vật biển, 

trong khi phía bên kia là đất nông nghiệp. 

•  Khu vực này đối diện với vách đá, và ngay trước mặt là bãi biển và biển. 

Thân bài 2 

•  Mô tả bản đồ sau thay đổi 
•  Nơi này đã được chuyển đổi thành một công viên, và nằm trên đường phụ hiện tại là 

một bãi đậu xe. 

•  Một lối đi bộ được xây dựng từ phía tây sang phía đông, bao quanh một hồ nước mới 

ở phía tây và khu rừng ở phía đông. 

•  Cây xanh được trồng dọc theo lối đi để tạo thêm bóng mát, và một quán cà phê mới 

đã được lắp đặt phía sau bãi đậu xe. 

•  Vách đá phía trước hiện có các bậc thang để cho phép nhiều du khách đến bãi biển 

hơn. 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

The maps describe the transformation of a coastal land into a  park. 

Overall, the land in front of the cliff has been upgraded with several facilities for park, while 
the beach behind now has easier access. 

Before development, there were farm buildings on the side road, in the centre of the coastal 
land. To the left of these constructions were unused land and sea animals’ shelters, whereas 
the other side was agricultural land. This area faced the cliff, right in front of the beach and 
sea. 

The place has been converted into a park, and located on the side road at present is a car 
park. A footpath was built from the west to the east, surrounding a new lake on the west and 
woods on the east. Trees were grown along the path to provide more shade, and a new 
coffee shop was installed behind the car park. The cliff in the front now has steps to allow 
more visitors to the beach. 

Cấu trúc câu 

Để diễn đạt các vị trí trong bài, người viết có thể sử dụng những cấu trúc sau:  

•  There were farm buildings on the side road 
•  To the left of these constructions were unused land 
• 
•  A footpath was built from the west to the east 

Located on the side road is a car park 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 20/01/2022 

Many people argue that in order to improve educational quality, high school students should 
be encouraged to make comments or even criticism on their teachers. Others think it will lead 
to loss of respect and discipline in the classroom. Discuss both views and give your own 
opinion. 

 
 
 
 
Dàn bài chi tiết 

30 

Mở bài: 

•  Giới thiệu chủ đề 
•  Quan điểm: phản hồi từ học sinh là có lợi 

Thân bài 1: Lý do không nên cho phép học sinh nhận xét giáo viên → Gây ra sự thiếu tôn 
trọng và vô kỷ luật 

•  Học sinh cần phải tôn trọng và nghe lời thầy cô →Việc học sinh chỉ trích giáo viên là 

không phù hợp 

•  Học sinh còn suy nghĩ bốc đồng và chưa trưởng thành →Nhận xét sẽ là chỉ trích giáo 

viên 

Thân bài 2: Lý do khuyến khích học sinh nhận xét giáo viên 

•  Học sinh sẽ phải suy nghĩ về vấn đề của mình một cách chủ động 
•  Giáo viên có thể điều chỉnh bản thân từ nhân xét của học sinh 
•  → Tạo ra lớp học thú vị hơn, phù hợp với cả 2 đối tượng 

 
 
 
31 

Kết bài: Nhắc lại quan điểm: Học sinh không phải là người tốt nhất để đưa ra nhận xét cho 
giáo viên, nhưng điều này vẫn có lợi cho nền giáo dục. 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

People have different views on whether high school students should be allowed to evaluate 
and criticize their teachers. Although this could be perceived as being disrespectful, I 
believe constructive feedback from students could do wonders for our education system. 

On  the  one  hand,  proponents  of  the  idea  that  students  should  not  be  allowed  to  make 
comments regarding their teachers claim that this can result in disrespect and lead to poorly 
behaved  students.  It  is  common  knowledge  that  students  should look  up  to their  teachers 
and obey all  of  their  instructions.  Having  a  student,  who  is impulsive and  inexperienced, 
criticizing  a  professional  teacher  is  not  appropriate  in  many  cultures.  In  addition,  even  the 
majority of high school students are usually not mature enough to make objective judgments. 
Their  feedback  might  end  up  being personal  criticism, which  contributes  nothing  to  the 
improvement of the quality of the education. 

 On the other hand, many people, including myself, believe that it is beneficial for both students 
and  teachers  if  there  is  an  open  environment  where  students  can  freely express  their 
opinions, including  their  thoughts  about  their  teachers.  This two-way  communication allows 
students to actively think about the lessons, and specifically what they want their teachers to 
improve.  Moreover,  thanks  to  student  feedback,  teachers  might  recognise  their  own 
weaknesses and find ways to make adjustments to their pedagogical skills. Consequently, their 
lessons are likely to become more interesting as it suits both parties, which might result in a 
better learning outcome. 

 In conclusion, students might not be the best people to comment on their teachers. However, 
I strongly believe that encouraging students to provide relevant feedback about their teacher’s 
teaching methods is advantageous for the education system. 

Vocabulary 

constructive feedback: nhận xét mang tính xây dựng 

impulsive (adj): bốc đồng 

look up to (p.v): tôn trọng 

•  disrespectful: thiếu tôn trọng 
• 
•  do wonders for: có lợi ích lớn cho  
• 
•  obey (v): tuân theo 
• 
•  personal criticism (n): công kích cá nhân 
•  express their opinions: thể hiện quan điểm của họ 
• 
• 
•  pedagogical skills (n): những kĩ năng sư phạm 
• 

two-way communication: giao tiếp 2 chiều 
adjustment (n): sự điều chỉnh 

learning outcome (n): kết quả học tập 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 15/01/2022 

The bar chart shows the percentage of males and females aged 18-20 in a city who participated 
in various activities in one month in 2015. 

 
 
 
 
32 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

The bar chart illustrates the proportion of males and females between 18 and 20 taking part 
in different activities in one month in 2015. 

Overall, the most popular activity for young males was football, while cycling was most 
favored by women. In addition, except for cycling, there was a stark difference in the 
participation rates of males and females in all activities. 

Cycling and swimming were preferred by females to males. To be more precise, about 35% 
of women participated in swimming whereas only 20% of their male counterparts took part in 
this activity in 2015. The difference between the percentages in cycling was less pronounced. 
40% of females cycled in this month, higher than the figure for males by about 5%. 

Regarding other activities, football attracted over 50% of men, which was much higher than 
the figure for females, at approximately 14%. Additionally, the percentage of males 
participating in basketball was over 30%, threefold that of females. The similar difference 
was witnessed in the figures for hockey, with over 10% of men and 3% of women taking 
part in this sport. 

Cấu trúc câu 

Để diễn đạt nội dung “35% phụ nữ tham gia vào hoạt động đạp xe”,  người viết có thể sử 
dụng những cấu trúc sau:  

•  About 35% of women participated/took part in cycling  
•  About 35% of women cycled 
•  The percentage of females participating/who participated in cycling was 35% 
•  Swimming attracted 35% of females 

 
 
 
 
33 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 15/01/2022 

Some think that people should not change their jobs while others think they should because 
it brings advantages for themselves, company and society. Discuss and give opinion 

Mở bài: 

•  Giới thiệu chủ đề 
•  Quan điểm: Thay đổi công việc thường xuyên sẽ tốt hơn 

Thân bài 1: Bàn luận vè việc duy trì một công việc trong thời gian dài 

•  Đảm bảo sự ổn định tài chính: thu nhập, các chế độ bảo hiểm và thưởng, thăng tiến 

cho nhân viên lâu năm 

•  Cơ hội làm việc cao hơn. Lý do: người hay nhảy việc được xem là không đáng tin cậy 

và dễ chán nản 

Thân bài 2: Bàn luận về việc thay đổi công việc thường xuyên 

•  Mở rộng kiến thức và phát triển kỹ năng mới. Ví dụ: cách hoà nhập và quy trình công 

việc mới →Phát triển kỹ năng giao tiếp và giải quyết vấn đề 

•  Vị trí cao hơn trong công việc nhanh chóng hơn bằng việc thể hiện khả năng và thích 
nghi nhanh chóng: Hiệu suất cao hơn cho doanh nghiệp và xây dựng nguồn nhân lực 
chất lượng cho xã hội 

Kết bài 

•  Nhắc lại: Dù việc duy trì một công việc có lợi ích về tài chính, thay đổi công việc giúp 

phát triển bản thân và xã hội ở nhiều khía cạnh hơn. 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

Apart from people who long for a stable and long-term job, many want to experience 
different occupations as they assume it is beneficial to themselves, company and society. 
Personally, while both have their own merits, I believe it is better to have a job change for 
reasons including self-enhancement. 

On the one hand, committing to one job can ensure financial stability for employees. As people 
work at one place for a long time, they will have a stable income and other benefits such as 
health or social insurance, plus promotions considering their contributions. These rewards and 
policies are usually applied to full-time employees or those who have worked for over a year. 
Applicants  frequently job-hopping stand  a  lower  chance  of  getting  accepted  into  a  new 
workplace  and  are  more  likely  to face  unemployment in  the  future.  Most  employers  would 
reconsider hiring candidates with a background of switching jobs regularly as this behaviour is 
often associated with the stereotypical image of an unreliable and easily dissatisfied worker. 

On the other hand, changing jobs once in a while can help people, especially the young, have 
the opportunity to develop a broader knowledge base and learn new skills. Many are put 
under new challenges such as fitting in or learning new procedures when working in a new 
environment, significantly enhancing their communication and problem-solving skills. 
Moreover, job hoppers can achieve career advancement without spending years for 
promotions, but they are often required to adapt more quickly and showcase their ability. 

 
 
 
34 

Their efforts to outperform can potentially create better business outputs and build a skilled 
workforce for a country's competitive economy. 

In conclusion, while working at one place can offer employees a more stable income and 
career prospects, switching jobs can boost their skills and benefit the company they work for 
and the country's economy. However, I believe that it is better to have a job change 
occasionally to foster personal growth from new challenges. 

Vocabulary 

self-enhancement (n): sự phát triển bản thân 
financial stability : sự ổn định tài chính 
social insurance : bảo hiểm xã hội 
job-hopping (n) : nhảy việc 
face unemployment : đối mặt với việc thất nghiệp 
stereotypical (a): mang tính khuôn mẫu 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  develop a broader knowledge base : phát triển nền tảng kiến thức rộng hơn 
fit in: làm việc/sinh sống dễ dàng, tự nhiên 
• 
achieve career advancement : đạt được sự thăng tiến trong công việc 
• 
showcase their ability : thể hiện khả năng của họ 
• 
create better business outputs : tạo ra kết quả kinh doanh tốt hơn 
• 
•  build a skilled workforce : xây dựng lực lượng lao động lành nghề 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 1 ngày 08/01/2022 

The table below shows the prices of a cup of coffee in 6 cities in Australia in 2010 and 2014. 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

The table compares the cost per cup of coffee in six Australian cities between 2010 and 2014. 

Overall, people had to pay significantly higher for coffee in Sydney than in the other 
countries. In addition, the price of a cup of coffee in Melbourne experienced the 
most remarkable rise over the course of time. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 

It cost 2.8 dollars for a coffee drink in Sydney in 2010, and an increase of 13.2% in selling 
price was recorded four years later. Melbourne, placed second highest at the coffee price in 
both years, had the most notable change of 20.8%, rising to 2.9 dollars. Brisbane sold 2.25 
dollars for a cup of coffee and was the only city with no price rise. 

Since 2010, Perth had boosted its price by 7.1%, slightly higher than the change in Adelaide. 
While people in Perth paid 2.25 per coffee drink, those in Adelaide paid 0.25 dollars less in 
2014. During the same period, the cheapest place to get coffee on the list was Canberra, at a 
charge of only 1.6 dollars and a dollar higher later. 

[Estimated band 7] 

Vocabulary 

remarkable (adj) : đáng kể 

• 
•  notable (adj): đáng chú ý 
•  boost (v): tăng 

Giải đề thi IELTS Writing Task 2 ngày 08/01/2022 

Some people think that some individuals are naturally good leaders while others think 
individuals can learn leadership skills. Discuss both views and give your opinion. 

Bài mẫu tham khảo 

People hold differing views on whether leadership is learned or innate. Although some 
aspects of leadership are probably inherited, I believe that leadership skills can be acquired 
through training and practice. 

On  the  one  hand,  many  people  claim  that  leaders  are  born  with  a charismatic  personality, 
giving  them a  considerable  advantage over  other  people.  These distinctive  personal 
traits enable people to become naturally good at leading and inspiring others. For example, 
leaders  need  to  be  able  to  positively  influence  others,  either  by  their innate  charisma or 
their powerful presence. As these natural abilities are not something that can be obtained over 
time, those who do not possess them may face difficulty in convincing or motivating others, 
which may prevent them from becoming inspiring leaders. 

On the other hand, other people, including myself, believe that the vast majority of leaders are 
not  born  to  lead,  but  prepared  to  lead.  There  are  many  skills  relating  to  leadership  that 
are learnable and achievable, such as communication skills or problem-solving skills. As long 
as a person receives proper training and puts enough effort into honing these skills, they can 
also become an effective leader. That is the reason why there are many leadership training 
programs and courses that aim to train those who want to develop their leadership capabilities. 
Most  people  can reap  significant  rewards from  these  courses,  enabling  them  to  successfully 
lead others. 

In conclusion, it is true that some traits of leadership are likely to be genetic. However, I believe 
that everybody can become a great leader because leadership consists of a lot of skills that can 
be learned and developed over time. 

Innate (adj) bẩm sinh 

Inherit (v) thừa kế 

 
 
36 

charismatic personality: tính cách lôi cuốn 

a considerable advantage: một lợi thế đáng kể 

distinctive personal traits: đặc điểm cá nhân đặc biệt 

 innate charisma: sức hút bẩm sinh 

powerful presence: sự hiện diện mạnh mẽ 

inspiring (adj): truyền cảm hứng 

learnable (adj): có thể học được 

problem-solving skills (n): kỹ năng giải quyết vấn đề 

leadership capabilities (n): năng lực lãnh đạo. 

reap significant rewards: gặt hái những lợi ích đáng kể  

Genetic (adj) di truyền 

 
 
 
 
