Phạm Tiến Dũng is an IELTS Training Institution with high 
teaching  quality  under  written  guarantee. 
With  many  experts  in  training  students  of 
non-English  speaking  countries  to  achieve 
different 
international  certificates,  Phạm Tiến Dũng 
carries out the mission of making English the 
second official language in Vietnam. For each 
course and program, Phạm Tiến Dũng provides students 
with constant and high quality support as an 
to  become 
endeavor 
successful  in  the  real  tests.  Apart  from 
official hours with teachers, Phạm Tiến Dũng also supply 
students  with  self-studying  materials  which 
are either collected from trusting sources or 
composed  by  our  professional  staff.  For 
putting such priority on quality of each hour 
of learning, Phạm Tiến Dũng receives non-stop advocacy 
and is a trustworthy institution in training. 

to  assist 

them 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SELF STUDY RESOURCES

Key and Explanation Cambridge IELTS Reading Test – 
Free Download – http://zim.vn 

IELTS Writing Task 2 – IELTS Simon’s Essay Analysis – 
Free Download – http://zim.vn 

The Complete Solution IELTS Writing – 
Free Download – http://zim.vn 

The Complete Solution IELTS Writing 
Premium Version ( 29USD – 49 USD – 99 USD) – 
http://zim.vn 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LỜI MỞ ĐẦU 

IELTS  WRITING  TASK  2  –  2016  REVIEW 
bao gồm 36 bài mẫu band 8 cho tất cả các chủ đề 
xuất  hiện  vào  năm  2016  nhằm  giúp  các  sĩ  tử 
IELTS có cái nhìn tổng quát và thực tế về độ khó 
của  bài  thi  viết  task  2  cũng  như  xu  hướng ra  đề 
thi viết IELTS. Cuốn Review là một nguồn đáng 
tin  cậy  và  hữu  ích  dành  cho  người  học  IELTS, 
với chủ biên là thầy Toàn Phạm Tiến Dũng - Giám Đốc Học 
Thuật Anh Ngữ Phạm Tiến Dũng cùng các giảng viên chuyên 
môn tại Phạm Tiến Dũng. 

Sách  đặc  biệt  phù  hợp  và  phát  huy  tác  dụng  tốt 
nhất đối với người sử dụng có kiến thức nền vững 
chắc về tiếng Anh cũng như về IELTS Writing.  

Sách  có  thể  được  sử  dụng  làm  nguồn  học  liệu 
tham khảo cho các thầy cô hoặc trung tâm luyện 
thi  IELTS  khác.  Khi  sử  dụng  rất  mong  các  thầy 
cô và trung tâm vui lòng dẫn nguồn. 

Phạm Tiến Dũng IELTS INSTITUTE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Giới thiệu chủ biên 

Nguyễn Anh Toàn ( Toan Phạm Tiến Dũng) 

Giám Đốc Học Thuật – Anh Ngữ Phạm Tiến Dũng 

IELTS 8.5 – 8.5 Writing 

Thầy là một trong những ứng viên tiêu biểu Quý 

1,2/2016 của chương trình Writers of the Future 

(WOTF) - cuộc thi viết truyện ngắn về khoa học 
viễn  tưởng  uy  tín tại  Mỹ  do  L.Ron  Hubbard 

sáng lập từ thập niên 80. Cuộc thi được tổ chức 

hàng năm nhằm tìm kiếm những tài năng nổi bật 

về văn chương. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HƯỚNG DẪN SỬ DỤNG TÀI LIỆU 

1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
Review về các chủ đề trong năm 2016  

Trong 35 chủ đề ra vào năm 2016 này có đủ 5 dạng essay: Opinion, Discussion, Advantage & 
Disadvantage, Cause & Solution và Direct-Question.  

 
 
 
 
 

Opinion: 14 
Discussion: 5  
Advantage & Disadvantage: 4  
Cause & Solution: 6  
Direct-Question: ra 6  

Như thống kê ở trên có thể thấy dạng đề được ra nhiều nhất 2016 là Opinion.  Độ khó của đề 
thi không giống nhau qua các tháng trong năm:  

 
 

Đề khó rơi vào các tháng 2,3,4,7 và 8.  
Tháng 11 và 12 đề dễ thở nhất. Điều này hầu như xảy ra ở vài năm trở lại đây nên có 

thể đến năm 2017 vẫn như vậy.  

Về xu hướng ra đề, hiện tại nhiều đề viết IELTS tập trung vào những mẳng rất nhỏ của đời sống 
như: “tại sao con người lại phí phạm một lượng lớn thức ăn” hay “tại sao bây giờ người ta lại 
chuộng cách ăn mặc kiể Tây”. Những đề như vậy đòi hỏi tư duy và kiến thức tốt cũng như vốn 
từ khá lớn để có thể viết tốt. Xu hướng này có thể vẫn tiếp tục trong Năm 2017.  

2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
DANH MỤC BÀI MẪU 

Đề thi ngày 9-1-2016 

Đề thi ngày 14-1-2016 

Đề thi ngày 23-1-2016 

Đề thi ngày 30-1-2016 

Đề thi ngày 18-2-2016 

Đề thi ngày 20-2-2016 

Đề thi ngày 27-2-2016 

Đề thi ngày 5-3-2016 

Đề thi ngày 12-3-2016 

Đề thi ngày 19-3-2016 

Đề thi ngày 2-4-2016 

Đề thi ngày 16-4-2016 

Đề thi ngày 21-4-2016 

Đề thi ngày 7-5-2016 

Đề thi ngày 19-5-2016 

Đề thi ngày 21-5-2016 

Đề thi ngày 28-5-2016 

Đề thi ngày 4-6-2016 

Đề thi ngày 16-6-2016 

Đề thi ngày 18-6-2016 

Đề thi ngày 25-6-2016 

Đề thi ngày 9-7-2016 

Đề thi ngày 14-7-2016 

Đề thi ngày 16-7-2016 

Đề thi ngày 30-7-2016 

Đề thi ngày 4-8-2016 

Page 5 

Page 6 

Page 7 

Page 8 

Page 9 

Page 10 

Page 11 

Page 12 

Page 13 

Page 14 

Page 15 

Page 16 

Page 17 

Page 18 

Page 19 

Page 20 

Page 21 

Page 22 

Page 23 

Page 24 

Page 25 

Page 26 

Page 27 

Page 28 

Page 29 

Page 30 

3

e
g
a
P

 
 
Đề thi ngày 27-8-2016 

Đề thi ngày 10-9-2016 

Đề thi ngày 15-9-2016 

Đề thi ngày 24-9-2016 

Đề thi ngày 8-10-2016 

Đề thi ngày 22-10-2016 

Đề thi ngày 5-11-2016 

Đề thi ngày 26-11-2016 

Đề thi ngày 3-12-2016 

Đề thi ngày 17-12-2016 

Page 31 

Page 32 

Page 33 

Page 34 

Page 35 

Page 36 

Page 37 

Page 38 

Page 39 

Page 40 

4

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 9-1-2016 

It is more important for schoolchildren to 
learn about local history than world 
history. 

To what extent to you agree or disagree? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Thorough insights into: Hiểu biết cặn kẽ 

về cái gì. 

2. Patriotism: Lòng yêu nước. 
3. Sovereignty: Chủ quyền. 
4. Take  pride  in  their  origin:  Tự  hào  về 

lòng yêu nước. 

5. Traditional  values  and  identity:  Những 

giá trị truyền thống và con người. 

6. Well-rounded  perspective  of  life:  Một 
cái  nhìn  quan  điểm  toàn  diện  hơn  về 
cuộc sống. 

7. Historical  backgrounds:  Bối  cảnh  lịch 

sử. 

8. Company  culture:  Văn  hóa  doanh 

nghiệp. 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Many people have valued the role of local history to schoolchildren 
over  that  of  world  history.  In  my  opinion, I  disagree  with  those 
people as both of them are equally essential for young learners. 

Studying the history of their hometown is for sure an indispensable 
part  of  school’s  curriculum  during  students’  early  education. I 
believe having thorough insights into what happened in the past at 
one’s  locality  develops  his patriotism.  For  example,  children  of 
primary  and secondary  schools in my  village are taught about how 
their  ancestors  defended  their  land  against  outside  intruders  and 
reclaimed sovereignty. Therefore, those young children would take 
they  have 
pride 
today. Additionally, I think it is not only students’ privilege but also 
their  responsibility  to  know  about  their  own  history  to  understand 
their hometown’s traditional values and identity. 

their  origin and 

treasure 

life 

the 

in 

From  another  angle,  learning  about  world  history  shares  equal 
importance  just  as  local  one.  Acquiring  knowledge  about  the 
world’s  past  events  equips  students  with  a  more well-rounded 
perspective  of  life.  Lessons  about  the  World  War  or  Feminism 
protest against women’s abuse and discrimination would help those 
learners  enhance  their  understanding  about  various  aspects  of  the 
world. Furthermore,  I  think  that  being  taught  about  the  other 
countries’ historical  backgrounds would  benefit  young  learners in 
their  future  career.  Students  who  accumulate  knowledge  of  this 
particular field at an early age would possess a golden selling point 
to  work  for  foreign  enterprises,  especially  those  who  highly 
value company culture like Japan.  

In  conclusion,  I  believe 
the  significance  of  domestic  and 
international history cannot be brought into comparison to see which 
one  is  more  necessary  because  they  have  distinctively  equal 
meanings to children.  

Word count: 279 

5

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC : 14-1-2016 

Many  museums  and  historical  sites  are 
mainly  visited  by  tourists  but  not  local 
people. Why is this the case and what can 
be  done  to  attract  more  local  people  to 
visit these places?  

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Tend  to  pay  a  visit  to  museums:  Có  xu 

hướng đi thăm bảo tang. 

2. Visually unattractive to local residents: 

Không thu hút được dân cư địa phương 

vì bề ngoài. 

3. Pick  tourists’  curiosity:  Lấy  được  sự  tò 

mò từ du khách. 

4. Education and entertainment purposes: 

Mục đích giáo dục và giải trí. 

5. Didactic  as  well  as 

recreational 

competitions:  Những  cuộc  thi  vừa  giải 

trí vừa mang tính giáo dục 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Many  museums  and  historical  sites  have  become  an  attraction  to 
tourists  although  they  fail  to  increase  the  number  of  local  visitors. 
This  essay  will  analyze  some  main  reasons  for  this  as  well  as 
measures to encourage more local people to visit such places.  

The  causes  for  a  huge  difference  in  the  number  of  the  two 
mentioned types of visitors are varied. First, people who live in the 
neighborhood seem to be familiar with their traditional customs and 
history.  Going  to  those  places  would  be  therefore  a  waste  of  time 
and money owing to the entrance cost; and people would not pay an 
amount of money to see what they have already known. Meanwhile, 
tourists from other places tend to pay a visit to museums to know 
more about a new culture when travelling to a new region. Second, 
the  design  of  museums  and  historical  sites  almost  remained 
unchanged throughout decades, which can be visually unattractive 
to local residents who have been there at least once in earlier years. 
However,  these places always  pick  tourists’ curiosity during their 
first trip.  

Some  measures can be taken to  stimulate more local inhabitants to 
visit  museums  and  historical  places.  To  begin  with,  those  places 
should  serve  both  education  and  entertainment  purposes.  More 
game  zones  should  be  constructed  or  didactic  as  well  as 
recreational  competitions  should  be  conducted  to  increase  the 
number of the local who come enjoy their time. Furthermore, if the 
layout  of  museums  and  historical  sites  is  renovated  with  more 
decorations  and ornate designs  of the interior,  not  only tourists but 
also more local visitors will come. 

In  conclusion,  there  are  two  principal  causes  for  the  locals’ 
disinterest in spending their time in nearby museums and historical 
places  as  mentioned,  and  actions  should  be  taken  to  encourage 
people to go to such places. 

Word count: 301 

6

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 23-1-2016 

Although  more  and  more  people  read  the 
news  on  the  Internet,  newspaper  will 
remain the most important source of news 
for the majority of people. 

Do  you  agree  or  disagree  with  that 
statement? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. To hold the most vital position: Giữ vai 

trò thiết yếu 

2. To  access  huge  storage  of  news:  Tiếp 

cận trữ lượng thông tin lớn 

3. To  take  over  the  position  of  printed 
newspaper: Chiếm lấy vị trí của báo in 
4. To  unfold  the  possibility  to  upload 
videos  and  voice  records:  Mở  ra  khả 
năng đăng tải video và băng ghi âm 
5. The most crucial source of information: 

Nguồn thông tin quan trọng nhất 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Some  people  believe  that  despite  the  widespread  popularity  of  the 
online  media,  traditional  newspaper  will  still hold  the  most  vital 
position among  news  readers. In  my  opinion,  this  idea  is  rather 
absurd as the Internet has become increasingly dominant due to the 
benefits it offers. 

The  first  thing  that  attracts  people  to  reading  news  on  the  online 
sources is their easy access. With the presence of the Internet around 
almost every corner of the world, people with a portable device such 
as a mobile phone can access huge storage of news. In fact, latest 
events,  for  example  IS  Terrorist  attacks,  would  be  updated 
immediately  on  CNN  or  New  York  Times.  By  contrast,  with 
prolonging  procedures  including  editing  and  printing,  traditional 
newspaper might  not be able to compete with the Internet in terms 
of the updating speed.  

Another  benefit  with  which  the  Internet  can,  from  my  point  of 
view, take  over  the  position  of  printed  newspaper is  the  new 
experience it brings to readers. One limitation of newspaper is that it 
cannot  convey  visual  messages  to  the  people  who  read  news  on  a 
regular  basis.  Meanwhile,  non-stop  progress  of  the  technology 
industry  has unfolded  the  possibility  to  upload  videos  and  voice 
records on various online websites. For instance,  soccer fans these 
days  can  re-watch  their  favorite  matches  anytime  they  want  with 
only a laptop connected to the Internet, which a mere paper cannot 
do. 

In conclusion,  I  disagree that printed newspaper would  continue to 
be the most crucial source of information because more and more 
people will be drawn to use the Internet.  

Word count: 262 

7

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Although  prison  sentences  are  commonly  thought  to  effectively 
control illegalities,  improvements  on  education  have  gained social 
endorsement  as  a  means  to eliminate  the  problem  from  its 
root. In my opinion, I disagree that education is the better one as it 
is  rather  impossible  to  compare  these  two  methods’  effectiveness 
owing to their distinct impacts. 

On the one hand, the reasons why prisons are of necessity for social 
security  are  varied. They  are  the  place  to  keep  people  who  have 
broken  the  law  contained,  ensuring  the  safety  of  other  citizens. 
Especially,  dangerous  criminals  such  as  murderers  or  rapists  have 
to be  imprisoned  for  their heinous  actions. Furthermore,  severe 
prison  sentences act as  a deterrent  against  crimes. Knowing there 
might  be  a  chance  of  being  condemned  to  jail,  which  also  means 
losing  freedom  and  living  a  miserable  life  in  a  cell,  ones  who  are 
having  the  intention  of  committing  illegalities  would  reconsider 
going down the path. 

On the other hand, education serves as a remedy for the origin of 
crimes. Education contributes greatly to heighten people’s intellect 
and  to  form  a civilized  society.  With  access  to  better  educational 
services,  citizens  would  be  well-informed  about  the  damage  that 
committing crimes would cause to their community and themselves, 
which  eventually  leads  to  the  decline  in  crime  rates. Additionally, 
the  possession  of  certain  qualifications 
through  fundamental 
education  like vocational  training  could  secure  a  person’s  stable 
life, which would dispel any ideas of committing crimes. 

In conclusion, I believe there is no absolute way to deduce whether 
imprisonment policies or better education would take the dominant 
role  in  dealing  with  crimes  as  they  both  tackle  the  problem  just in 
different ways. 

Word count: 275 words 

TOPIC: 30-1-2016 

is  the  common  way 

Prison 
in  most 
countries  to  solve  the  problem  of  crime. 
However,  a  more  effective  solution  is  to 
provide people a better education. Do you 
agree or disagree? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Illegality: Hành động bất hợp pháp 
2. Social  endorsement:  Sự  ủng  hộ  từ  xã 

hội 

3. Eliminate  the  problem  from  its  root: 

Loại bỏ nguồn góc của vấn đề 

4. To  be  of  necessity:  Là  một  sự  cần  thiết 

không thể thiếu (nhấn mạnh) 
5. Social security: An ninh xã hội 
6. To be imprisoned: Bị bỏ tù 
7. Heinous actions: Hành động tội ác 
8. To  be  a  deterrent  against  sth:  Là  một 

rào cản chống lại cái gì đó 

9. To be condemned to jail: Bị tống vào tù 
10. 
To  serve  as  a  remedy  for  the 
origin  of  crimes:  Như  là  một  liều  thuốc 
cho nguồn gốc của tội phạm 

11. 

To  heighten  people’s 

intellect: 

Nâng cao dân trí 

A civilized society: Một xã hội văn 

12. 

minh 

13. 
14. 

Vocational training: Học nghề 
To dispel any ideas of committing 
crimes:  Loại  bỏ  bất  kì  ý  định  muốn 
phạm tội 

8

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 18-2-2016 

New  technologies  have  changed  the  way 
children spend their free time.  

of 

this 

outweigh 

advantages 

Do 
disadvantages? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Satisfy children of different preferences 

for entertainment: Thỏa mãn trẻ em với 

những sở thích giải trí khác nhau 

2. Develop  a  passive  lifestyle:  Phát  triển 

lối sống thụ động 

3. If  exposed  frequently:  Nếu  tiếp  xúc 

thường xuyên 

4. Exposure  to  technology  could  lead  to 

deterioration  in  health:  sự  tiếp  xúc  với 

công nghệ có thể dẫn đến tình trạng sức 

khỏe bị giảm sút 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

The  advent  of  new  technologies  has  led  to  changes  in  young 
children’s  recreational  activities.  In  my  view,  the  drawbacks  of 
those changes are more significant than the benefits. 

On the one hand, the appearance of new devices has brought certain 
values  to  children.  First,  more  choices  are  now  available  on 
computers  or  any  other  electrical  devices  that  are  connected  to the 
Internet.  This  would  satisfy children  of  different  preferences for 
entertainment,  such  as  watching  movies,  listening  to  music  or 
playing  games  on  online  platform.  Second,  some  useful  skills  and 
necessary  qualities  can  be  either  initially  obtained  or  horned  by 
playing electronic games. Scientifically, racing games help develop 
motor skills in later life. Also, creativity and fast reflexes which are 
of great use in the future can be enhanced though puzzle or shooting 
games. 

Despite those said advantages, I still believe that the downside of the 
emergence  of  modern  technological  devices  in  children’s  leisure 
time  is  more  worrying.  The  first  drawback  is  that  children  might 
develop  a  passive  lifestyle  and  possibly  isolate  themselves  from 
society.  This  is  because  this  way  of  entertainment  is  extremely 
addictive,  and  children  therefore  are  likely  to  spend  hours  in  their 
room without any communication with the outside world if exposed 
frequently.  Furthermore,  exposure  to  technology  could  lead  to 
deterioration  in  health  as  hours  spent  on  using  computers  can 
cause  tremendous  harm  to  eyesight.  In  fact,  children  at  school  age 
are  suffering  from  short-sight  due  to  playing  video  games  or 
browsing Facebook for a long time. 

In  conclusion,  it  seems  to  me  that,  regarding  children’s  leisure 
activities, the benefits of newly introduced technological devices are 
eclipsed by the disadvantages. 

Word count: 272 

9

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 20-2-2016 

Some  people  believe  government  should 
spend money on building train and subway 
lines  to  reduce  traffic  congestion.  Others 
think that building more and wider roads is 
the better way to reduce traffic congestion. 
Discuss both views and give your opinion 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Tackle  congested  roads:  Giải  quyết  tắc 

đường 
2. Alleviate 

the 

current 

travelling 

overload: Giảm nhẹ tình trạng quá tải 
3. Relieves  the  density  of  passengers  on 
public vehicles: Giảm thiểu sự đông đúc 
cúa hành  khác  trên  những  phương  tiện 
công cộng 

4. Exceeds  the  capacity  of  the  current 
system:  Vươt  quá  khả  năng  của  hệ 
thống hiện tại  

5. The  enhancement  of  living  standards: 

Sự tăng lên về mức sống 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Opinions  diverge  greatly  on  how  to  tackle  traffic  congestion. 
Although constructing more railways and subway lines partly solves 
the problem, I would argue that the government should allocate their 
financial resources to widen roads.  

On  the  one hand,  I  understand why  some  people  think  that  having 
more  train  and  subway  lines  built  could  tackle  congested  roads. 
First,  this  mode  of  transportation  would  alleviate  the  current 
travelling  overload  because  it  decrease  the  increased  number  of 
daily  travelers  on  main  streets  in  either  city  centers  or  suburbs. 
There  would  be  less  people  on  street  during  rush  hours  because 
trains  or  subways  are  able  to  carry  hundreds  of  passengers  at  the 
same  time.  Second,  rail  transportation  systems  are  established 
separately  from  other  systems  or,  sometimes,  outside  crowded city 
areas,  and  this  relieves  the  density  of  passengers  on  public 
vehicles,  hence  reducing  congestions  caused  by  those  means  of 
transportation.  

On  the  other  hand,  I  would  side  with  those  who  think  that  the 
mentioned  investment  on  railroads  or  subway  lines  is  only 
temporary  and  less  effective  than  improving  the  size  of  roads  and 
streets.  Traffic  jam  is  attributable  to  the  density  of  vehicles  that 
exceeds the capacity of the current system. Increasing the size of 
roads  would  allow  a  higher  volume  of  traffic  and  enable  more 
vehicles, such as private cars or buses, to circulate smoothly. Also, 
expanding  roads,  although  expensive  and  time-consuming,  is 
believed  to  be  a  permanent  solution  to  the  situation  of  traffic  jam. 
Private  car  owners  are  increasing  in  numbers  owing  to  the 
enhancement of living standards, and they are unlikely to resort to 
trains  or  subways  since  using  their  own  cars  is  much  more 
convenient. Therefore, better railway systems only encourage a part 
of citizens to use this type of public transport.  

In  conclusion,  it  appears  to  me  state  money  should  go  to  the 
expansion  of  road  systems,  while  it  is  difficult  to  deny  some 
provisional change brought by railroads or subway lines. 

Word count: 322 

0
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 27-2-2016 

More  and  more  young  people 
from 
wealthy  countries  are  spending  a  short 
time  doing  unpaid  work  such  as  teaching 
or  building  houses  for  communities 
in 
poorer countries.  

Why  young  people  choose  to  do  so?  Who 
will  benefit  more:  young  people  or  the 
communities? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. A  great  deal  of  rewarding  experience: 

có nhiều kinh nghiệm quý báu 

2. Have  profound  understanding  of:  Có 

hiểu biết sâu về cái gì 

3. Fosters  a  great sense  of  humanity  and 

altruism:  Gia  tăng  tính  cộng  đồng  và 

long vị tha 

4. Heighten  social  living  standards:  Nâng 

cao mức sống xã hội 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

There  is  a  growing  number  of  young  people  from  rich  countries 
coming  to  less  developed  countries  to  participate  in  voluntary 
projects.  There  are  some  underlying  reasons  for  this,  and  both 
volunteers and the community gain equal benefits.  

The phenomenon can be attributable to two principal factors. First, 
short  trips  to  less  developed  nations  to  aid  the  local  communities 
bring  about  a  great  deal  of  rewarding  experience.  For  example, 
when  young  people  from  wealthy  nations  visit  underprivileged 
regions  in  Vietnam  such  as  Quang  Binh  province,  they  can  have 
profound  understanding  of  the  misery  and  hardship  of  the 
impoverished.  This  therefore  fosters  a  great  sense  of  humanity 
and altruism. Second, this situation is linked to the fact that young 
people  want  their  resume  to  be  polished  by  getting  involved  in 
social  activities  such  as  teaching  or  providing  accommodation  for 
the poor.   

Not only people who travel to third world countries to do voluntary 
work  but  also  the  local  community  benefit  from  this  particular 
practice.  Obtaining  new  experiences  and  possessing  a  clear 
advantage  in  applying  for  jobs,  those  people  are  more  likely  to 
develop  spiritually  and  to  succeed  in  future  career.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  local  community  can  have  a  chance  to  heighten  social 
living standards, even though the impact of such a practice can be 
relatively small and, in most cases, temporary.  

In  conclusion,  the  young  from  first  world  countries  move  to 
underdeveloped  ones  to  do  unpaid  work  in  order  to  gain  new 
experience  and  enhance  future  employment.  It  seems  that  both 
volunteers  and  the  area  that  receives  help  can  gain  some  certain 
values. 

Word count: 263 

1
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 5-3-2016 

In  recent  years,  the  structure  of  a  family 
and  the  role  of  its  members  are  gradually 
changing.  

What  kinds  of  changes  can  occur?  Do  you 
think  these  changes  are  positive  and 
negative? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Nuclear family: gia đình cơ bản gồm có 

bố mẹ và con cái 

2. Breadwinner: trụ cột gia đình 
3. Single-earner  family:  gia  đình  chỉ  có 

một trụ cột 

4. Spouse: người chồng hoặc vợ 
5. A  stay-at-home  parent:  bố  hoặc  mẹ  ở 
nhà để chăm sóc con cái và làm việc nhà 
6. At liberty to do sth: có thể tự do làm gì 

đó 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

In  the  past  few  decades,  the  patterns  of  a  family have  greatly 
diversified.  There  are  some  changes  regarding  its organization and 
members’  role;  and in  my  opinion,  these  changes can  be  seen  as a 
progress. 

Families at present have undergone two main differences compared 
to  the  past.  First,  a nuclear  family now  can  have  more  than 
one breadwinner who normally is the father. This is because in the 
modern world, only  a few jobs could secure the stability  of single-
earner  families,  which  forces  both  parents  to  be  the financial 
supporters.   Second, the trend  that  parents exchange  their  roles has 
become  more  common.  As  the  result  of  women’s  protest  for  their 
rights,  mothers  now  have  equal  opportunities  for  education  and 
work,  which  allows  the  other spouse to assume  responsibility as a 
stay-at-home  parent to 
the 
take  care  of 
housework. 

the  children  and 

From  my  perspective,  those  changes  in  a  family’s  structure  and 
parental roles are positive for a number of reasons. That both parents 
can  become  the  breadwinners  would  ensure  that  the  family  can  be 
more financially stable. This not only directly eases the burden that 
the father have to bear in order to support the whole family but also 
enables the mother to pursue her dream job. From another angle, it 
is an upward step that people are at liberty to do what they like and 
what they are good at. Women can follow their dream and become 
the main earner if they are better at work than their husbands. 

In conclusion, I think the changes occurring to a family’s hierarchy 
and  members’  responsibilities are  a  positive  step  toward  a  better 
world. 

Word count: 272 

2
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 12-3-2016 

to 

import 

Some believe that it is good for a country’s 
culture 
TV 
programmes, while others think it is better 
for  a  country  to  have  their  own  films  and 
TV programmes.  

films 

and 

Discuss  both  views  and  give  your  own 
opinion 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Telecasts: Chương trình TV 
2. Cultural diversity: sự đa dạng văn hóa 
3. Depraved customs: hủ tục 
4. Cultural assimilation: sự hòa tan văn 

hóa 

5. Exotic practices: tục lệ xa lạ 
6. Long-standing ethics: chuẩn mực đạo 

đức lâu đời 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

There  has  been a  difference  of  opinion regarding  the  merits  of 
foreign  movies  and  TV  channels  to  the  culture  of  a  country  as 
people  believe  domestic  products  would  be  better. From  my 
those  categories  are  equally  important. 
perspective,  both  of 

foreign 

as  Hollywood blockbusters are 

the  one  hand,  people  usually  believe 

films 
On 
and telecasts can  contribute 
to the  cultural  diversity of  a 
nation. Fascinating social  norms  and  practices,  such  as  public 
hugging  which  is  common  in  the  US,  can be  imported  to  other 
nations 
becoming  more 
popular. This phenomenon is believed to benefit the richness of the 
host country’s traditional backgrounds. Furthermore, the import of 
international  movies  and  TV  shows  could improve  the country’s 
sets of beliefs. In Vietnam, for example, the ceremony of funerals is 
often perpetuated  with ongoing depraved 
as 
gambling  and  drinking. Since  the  arrival  of  TV  shows  from  more 
developed  nations,  which  triggers  a  new  and  civilized  way  of 
thinking, such practices have been gradually aborted. 

customs such 

On the other hand, it appears to me that producing local movies and 
TV programs has the same importance. Citizens of a country would 
be  able  to acquire  knowledge about  their  own  culture. Apparently, 
profound insights into traditional values can be vividly conveyed in 
cinemas and in the media if the content is made by local people. The 
second  point  is  that  this  way  can relieve  the  worry of cultural 
assimilation which has emerged as a detriment to the existence of a 
country’s 
if exotic 
practices are absorbed thoughtlessly, it might lead to the oblivion of 
the long-standing ethics. 

traditional  beliefs  and  customs. In 

fact, 

In  conclusion,  I  would  argue  that  both  types  of  films  and  TV 
telecasts play an equal role in a country’s culture. 

Word count: 289 

3
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 19-3-2016 

in  community  now  could  buy 

People 
cheaper consumer goods. 

the 
Do 
disadvantages? 

advantages 

outweigh 

the 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Affordable commodities: mặt hàng giá 

rẻ 

2. Purchasing power: sức mua 

3. The market’s demand: nhu cầu của thị 

trường 

4. Commodities’ exorbitant price: giá cả 

đắt đỏ của hàng hóa 

5. Quality products: hàng chất lượng 

6. Toxic waste and exhaust: chất khí thải 

độc hại 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

choices for 
These  days,  buyers  have a  wider 
more affordable commodities. Although some benefits can be seen 
from the phenomenon, the drawbacks are more significant. 

range  of 

of 

for 

cheaper 

provision 

goods presents 

economical  merits 

several 
The 
advantages. Regarding 
individuals, 
customers now can enjoy inexpensive purchases of diverse types of 
goods,  which  is  particularly  favorable  for  the  households  with 
limited  incomes.  In  comparison  with  the  past  in  Vietnam,  most 
families could not be able to buy a TV; however, TV is among the 
most  common  electronic  devices  in  every  household  owing  to 
reduced prices. On the societal level, the affordability of consumer 
the 
products  promotes  people’s purchasing  power,  hence 
development  of  the  economy.  It  is  common  knowledge that 
the market’s  demand for  products  increases  when commodities’ 
exorbitant prices are reduced. Therefore, people will be attracted to 
buying  these  products  on  a  large  scale,  fostering the  general 
prosperity of a country’s economy. 

However,  those  advantages  above  still  cannot  overshadow  the 
disadvantages. First,  the  quality  of  commodities  might  be  only 
secondary  when  profit  is  primary  for  businesses  because  goods’ 
prices are inexpensive and the quantity needed is enormous. In the 
long term, without quality products, customers will gradually lose 
those 
their 
products’  manufacturers,  which 
trust 
directly jeopardizes 
the  economy. Another  repercussion  worth 
mentioning is that the environment may suffer. In order to meet the 
to  expand 
increased  demand  from  buyers,  companies  have 
their factories  and  accelerate 
their  production  process.  Such 
expansion would do grave harm to the surrounding due to their toxic 
waste and exhaust. 

in 

In conclusion, the benefits of cheapening modern goods should not 
be overrated as the disadvantages are greater. 

Word count: 271 

4
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 2-4-2016 

It  is  impossible  to  help  all  people  in  the 
world,  so  governments  should  focus  on 
people in their own countries.  

To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. International  aids  to  deprived  regions: 

Hỗ  trợ  quốc  tế  đến  những  vùng  nghèo 

khó 

2. The  underprivileged:  Người  nghèo, 

người bất hạnh 

3. The well-being of their citizens: Sự sung 

túc của công dân 

4. Any  acts  of  global  assistance:  Bất  kì 

hành động trợ giúp quốc tế nào 

5. Underdeveloped 

countries:  Những 

nước kém phát triển 

6. Domestic  poverty:  Đói  nghèo  trong 

nước 

7. Affluent nations: Những nước giàu có 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

aids 
The  question  whether  governments 
internationally  or  domestically  has  drawn  much  attention  from  the 
public. Although  I  understand  why  helping  everyone  in  the 
world  is  unachievable,  I  strongly  disagree  that governmental 
support should  solely be concentrated  on satisfying local needs. 

should  provide 

On the one hand, I suppose the world’s leaders’ hesitation over the 
provision  of international  aids to deprived  regions is  legitimate. 
Firstly,  it  is  unfeasible  for  governments’  support  to  reach  all  of 
the underprivileged as their number is enormous in many separated 
places  around  the  globe  and  the  type  of  support  they  need  also 
varies.  For  example,  developed  nations  may  encounter  numerous 
obstacles  in  terms  of  transportation  when  sending  food  and 
medicines  to poor  regions in  Africa  where  people  are  facing  the 
threat  of  famine  or  contagions.  Secondly,  I  believe  leaders  of  a 
country  should  prioritize  the well-being  of  their  citizens and 
stabilize their economy and politics before carrying out any acts of 
global assistance. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  still  believe  governments  should  help  as 
many  people  as  they  can  regardless  of  the  fragile  possibility 
for worldwide  comprehensive  support for  all  people.  To  begin 
with,  in  many underdeveloped  countries,  their  leaders  are  unable 
to bear the burden of eradicating domestic poverty or crises due to, 
for  example,  terrorism,  which  calls  for  the  involvement  from 
other affluent  nations.  Also  of  great  significance  is  that  this 
national act  of  charity could  have  a  huge  impact  on  individuals 
living  in prosperous  areas.  If  the  government  take  actions  to  help 
people overseas, citizens of that country will idolize the idea of self-
devotion toward a better world. 

In conclusion, I truly believe the world leaders should lend their 
neighbors  a  hand  to  offer  help  to  people  in  need  on  their 
doorstep. 

Word count: 289 

5
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

study in  order 

Many  people  believe  more  financial  resources  should  be  allocated 
to universe 
to  discover a  new  habitable 
environment for  humans  due  to the  increasingly  harsh  living 
conditions on  Earth.  In  my  opinion,  this  idea  is  completely 
justifiable. 

The  population  explosion is  the  first  urgent  matter  that  urges 
results  from space  study.  The  world  is  facing  the  threat  from the 
lack  of  land  and  accommodation for  the  ever-increasing rate  of 
birth.  Especially  in densely  populated  cities like  Hanoi,  it  is  a 
common  picture  of  people  struggling  to  find  an  apartment.  This 
forces humans to resort to alternatives of changing living places to 
other planets. Such an idea would not be actualized without enough 
money 
to  employ  scientists  or  establish  research  facilities, 
emphasizing the demand for sponsorships. 

Another thing which justifies the budget spent on discovering a new 
suitable  home  for  human  beings  is  the depletion  of  natural 
resources,  such  as  fuel  and  water.  Unfortunately,  fossil  fuels  and 
water reservoir are being over-exploited for short-term benefits. In 
the  long  term,  essential  elements  for sustaining  life will  dwindle 
away,  and  human  life  will  be  put  at  stake  since  there is  no  fuel  to 
maintain  production  or  transportation.  Therefore,  if there  is  even  a 
fragile hope to discover a new environment, people should value the 
opportunity  and  invest  money  in  researches  on  the  space  to 
ensure the survival of the human race. 

In  conclusion,  I  strongly  suppose  that  financial  investments  on 
discovering  another  planet  as  a  new  home  to  replace  the  Earth  are 
reasonable.  

TOPIC: 16-4-2016 

Topic: In the future, it seems more difficult 
to  live  on  the  Earth.  Some  people  think 
spent  on 
more  money 
researching  other  planet  to  live,  such  as 
Mars. 

should  be 

To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Universe study: nghiên cứu vũ trụ 

2. A  new  habitable  environment:  môi 

trường có thể sinh sống 

3. The 

increasingly 

harsh 

living 

conditions:  điều  kiện  sống  ngày  càng 

khắc nghiệt 

4. The population explosion: Bùng nổ dân 

số 

5. Space studies: Nghiên cứu không gian 

6. The  lack  of  land  and  accommodation: 

thiếu hụt đất đai và chỗ ở 

7. Rate of birth: tỉ lệ sinh 

8. Densely  populated  cities:  thành  phố 

mật độ dân số cao 

Word count: 252 

9. Depletion of natural resources: cạn kiệt 

tài nguyên thiên nhiên 

10. 

Fossil fuel and water reservoir: bể 

chứa nước và nguyên liệu hóa thạch 

11. 

12. 

13. 

Over-exploited: khai thác quá đà 

Sustaining life: duy trì sự sống 

The  survival  of  the  human  race: 

sự sống còn của loài người 

6
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 21-4-2016 

Nowadays,  more  and  more  older  people 
who  need  employment  compete  with  the 
younger people for the same jobs.  

What  problems  this  causes?  What  are 
solutions? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Accumulated more experience: Tích lũy 

nhiều kinh nghiệm hơn 

2. Social unrest and crime escalation: Bất 

ổn xã hội và leo thang tội phạm  

3. Great  versatility  and  creativity:  sự  linh 

hoạt lớn và tính sáng tạo 

4. Old-age  pensions  and  medical  care: 

Lương hưu và chăm sóc y tế 

5. Retirement age: Tuổi nghỉ hưu 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

The job market has become more competitive as more older people 
start  to  apply  for  the  same  positions  as  younger  people.  This 
phenomenon  leads  to  several  severe  problems,  and  some  feasible 
solutions would be analyzed in the essay below.  

There  are  a  number of negative  outcomes  from  such a  competition 
between  young and old job  applicants.  First, young people have to 
compete  with  older  people  who  have  accumulated  more 
experience, which means that young people might fail to find work. 
This,  consequently,  heightens  unemployment  rates,  causing  social 
unrest  and  crime  escalation.  Second,  if  old  job  seekers  cannot 
compete  with  young  people  in  certain  fields  that  require  great 
versatility  and  creativity  like  sales  or  marketing,  they  might  not 
get a job. Without adequate financial means to support their family 
and themselves, elderly people might have to live in poverty. 

The  government  should  take  some  immediate  actions  to  mitigate 
this situation. New policies should be established in order to provide 
old  people  with  sufficient  social  benefits,  old-age  pensions  and 
medical care included, so that they can live comfortably when they 
retire.  Another  effective  solution  is  to  fix  retirement  age  over 
which no one is by law employed by any institutions or companies. 
This will reduce the level of competition for the same jobs between 
the young and the old and empower young people to increase their 
chances of getting their wanted positions.  

In conclusion, the mentioned competition could produce undesirable 
issues  to  both  old  and  young  job  applicants,  and  the  government 
certainly play a tremendous role in tackling those problems. 

Word count: 258 

7
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 7-5-2016 

Some  people  choose  to  have  their  first 
child at an older age.  

What  are  the  reasons?  Do  advantages 
outweigh disadvantages? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. To delay childbirth: Trì hoãn sinh con 
2. The  propensity  for  prioritizing  their 
careers  over  taking  parental  roles:  xu 
hướng  coi  trọng  nghề  nghiệp  trước  khi 
có con 

3. Adopted  a  fear  of  taking  unwanted 
custody:  Có nỗi sợ phải nuôi con không 
mong muốn sau khi li hôn 

4. Marital  harmony:  Sự  hòa  thuận  trong 

hôn nhân 

5. The  possibility  of  infertility:  Khả  năng 

vô sinh 

6. The occupational prioritization and the 
hesitation over the likelihood of single-
parent responsibility: Sự coi trọng nghề 
nghiệp  và  sự  đắn  đo  trước  khả  năng 
phải  nhận  trách  nhiệm  của  bố/mẹ  độc 
thân 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

There is a growing proportion of the world’s population who decide 
to  have  children later  in  life. The  underlying  reasons  for this  trend 
are  varied,  and  I  suppose  that  the  merits  would  eclipse  the 
downsides.  

There  are  two  main  factors  leading  to  the  decision  of delaying 
childbirth. The first one is because people have the propensity for 
prioritizing their careers over taking parental roles. Especially in 
the US and other developed countries, not only men but also women 
want  to  stabilize  their  finance  before  becoming  parents  so  as  to 
provide  their  kids  with  sufficient  living  condition  for  their  future 
development. Another  explanation  for  this  is  that  many  modern 
individuals have adopted a fear of  taking unwanted  custody due 
to  the  recent  alarming  rate  of  divorce. It  is  because  premature 
marriages  have  become  common,  which  usually  goes  with  many 
couples’  doubt  of  their marital  harmony,  deterring  their  early 
desire for raising a child. There would be, consequently, fewer kids 
growing up without fatherhood or motherhood. 

However,  the  drawbacks  should  not  be  overlooked. That  too  many 
couples  following  such  a  trend  might  exert  adverse  effects  on  the 
population  structure,  which  potentially  results  in  the  future  aging 
long 
workforce  and  hinders 
term. Additionally, 
it  could  both  heighten the  possibility  of 
infertility among  mothers  at  their  old  age  and  risk  the  new-born 
babies’  mental  and  physical  health.  Down  syndrome  could  be  a 
typical example of the problems that those kids might have to suffer 
from. 

social  development 

the 

in 

In conclusion, the occupational prioritization and the hesitation over 
the  likelihood  of  single-parent  responsibility could  be  seen  as  the 
root of late childbirth, and I am convinced that the advantages are of 
more significance.  

Word count: 279 

8
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

It  is  true  that  the  number  of  science  students  are  becoming 
inadequate  in  different  parts  of  the  world  nowadays.  The  essay 
below will analyze some explanations for this situation as well as its 
influence on society.  

There  are  two  principal  factors  that  contribute  to  the  common 
disinterest  in  science  subjects.  First,  those  subjects  are  often 
challenging and require a lot of diligence as well as a great deal of 
patience  and  intelligence.  The  number  of  researches  that  an 
average Biology student has to do is more than other subjects with 
higher 
level  of  both  difficulty  and  commitment,  which 
discourages  many  students  from  choosing  science  as  their  majors. 
Second, employment opportunities in this particular field are limited 
and  extremely  competitive.  Although  a  huge  amount  of  time  and 
effort is spent on science study at school, there is still little chance 
for them to get a job after graduation. 

Society  greatly  suffers  from  the  scarcity  of  human  resources  in 
science  fields.  Apparently,  as  the  number  of  science  students  is 
insignificant,  other  majors  such  as  business  or  economics  become 
prevalent,  hence  the  imbalance  in  future  workforce.  In  fact, 
competitiveness  increased  due  to  too  many  degree  holders  of  the 
same expertise pushes a worrying number of graduates to the verge 
of  unemployment.  Another  problem  is  the  shortage  of  science 
professionals  as  qualified  employees  are  low  in  number.  Unless 
more students decided to study science at university, sooner or later 
we would have to face a major human resource crisis.  

In conclusion, hurdles regarding some strict requirements of science 
subjects  and  employment  opportunities  are  factored  in  a  lot  of 
students not  choosing  such  subjects  to  study,  and  there are  serious 
problems arising from this situation. 

Word count: 280 

TOPIC: 19 – 5 - 2016  

It  is  observed  that  in  many  countries  not 
enough  students  are  choosing  to  study 
science subject.  

What are causes? And what will be effects 
on society? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Disinterest  in  science  subjects:  Không 

hứng thú với những môn khoa học 

2. Diligence  as  well  as  a  great  deal  of 

patience  and  intelligence:  Sự  chăm  chỉ 

cũng  như  là  rất  nhiều  kiên  nhẫn  và  sự 

thông minh 

3. Higher 

level  of  both  difficulty  and 

commitment: Độ khó và độ cam kết cao 

4. The scarcity of human resources:  Thiếu 

hụt nguồn nhân lực 

5. The  imbalance  in  future  workforce:  Sự 

mất cân bằng lực lượng lao động tương 

lai 

6. A  major  human  resource  crisis:  Khủng 

hoảng nguồn nhân lực 

9
1

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 21-5-2016 

In  developing  countries,  children  in  rural 
communities have less access to education. 
Some people believe that the problem can 
be  solved  by  providing  more  schools  and 
teachers,  while  others  think  that  the 
problem  can  be  solved  by  providing 
computers and Internet access.  

Discuss  both  views  and  give  your  own 
opinion. 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Approach education: Tiếp cận giáo dục 

2. Acquire  a  great  deal  of  knowledge 

from  the  online  platform:  Có  được 

lượng lón kiến thức từ Internet 

3. An effective studying environment: Môi 

trường học tập hiệu quả 

4. Their 

scholastic 

competence  and 

characteristics:  Khả  năng  học  tập  và 

tính cách 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

People have differing views about how to aid children in rural areas 
regarding  their  access  to  education.  Although  the  provision  of 
computers  and  the  Internet  can  temporarily  address  the  issue,  I 
would  argue  that  the  best  measure  is  to  establish  new  schools  and 
employ more teachers.  

On  the  one  hand,  I  understand  why  some  people  believe  that 
expanding  the  Internet  network  and  supplying  computers  for 
children  in  remote  areas  give  them  opportunities  to  approach 
education.  Firstly,  it  is  thought  that  students  can  acquire  a  great 
deal of knowledge from the online platform, most of which either 
is free of charge  or requires  small fees. Educational websites, such 
as Wikipedia, have been constantly established to promote distance 
learning  for  children  whose  neighborhoods  have  few  schools  and 
teachers. Secondly,  online classes and courses are widely available 
and  accessible,  which  makes  geographic  adversities  become  rather 
irrelevant.  It  is  because students,  regardless  of their  background  or 
location,  can  enroll  in  a  class  or  course  of  their  preference.  This 
would  therefore  aid  them  to  access  education  in  their  remote 
communities.  

On the other hand, I would side with those who think that building 
more schools and hiring new teachers would permanently solve the 
problem.  Only  schools  can  create  an  effective  studying 
environment  for  students  to  interact  or  compete  with  one  another 
and  comprehensively  develop  their  scholastic  competence  and 
characteristics.  Furthermore, 
teachers  can  discover  students’ 
weaknesses  during  their  teaching  process,  hence  better  and  more 
effective  educating  methodologies,  which  leads  to  more  fruitful 
results.  

In conclusion, it seems to me that it is best to construct schools and 
employ teachers in rural areas, instead of depending on technology 
to bring about education opportunities for children at such places. 

Word count: 281 

0
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

The younger generation are having great admiration for media and 
sport  celebrities although  they  are  not  perfect role  models to 
follow. In my view, this could be seen as detrimental. 

From one standpoint, emulating famous entertainment stars might 
spark changing  patterns  of  fashion  and  behavior among  young 
adults  who are  not  mature  enough  to judge  what  is  suitable  within 
their society. As matter of fact, they show a propensity for copying 
what those stars say or do on TV, even if their actions go against the 
cultural  value  of  some  localities.  Regarding  fashion,  the  way  Dam 
Vinh Hung, who is a renowned Vietnamese singer, dresses would be 
the onset of a modern yet rather unacceptable trend of fashion with 
exposed  skin.  Unfortunately,  the  young  have  yet  to  understand  the 
long-term  shortcomings  of  such  a  trend  to  traditional  way  of 
dressing  which values  the  beauty and  elegance  of  clothes  such  as 
the Ao Dai. 

Additionally, such  reverence  for  celebrities  in  the  field  of 
entertainment would  possibly  cause  a  detriment  to  social  security 
under certain circumstances. A typical example of this is the chaos 
during  and  after  Korean  singers  and  musical  bands’  show  in 
Vietnam  a  few  years  ago  when 
the  crowd  of  fans  went 
uncontrollable,  which  caused irritation  for  the  locals and  also 
danger  to  the  fans  themselves.  Furthermore,  if  their  idols  were 
criticized  due  to  their  scandals,  they  would  try  to sugar-coat the 
situation  or  even 
trigger  arguments.  This  would  be  really 
challenging for authorities to maintain security. 

In conclusion, I suppose the phenomenon that young people idolize 
media and sport celebrated individuals who are notorious in some 
aspects is negative. 

Word count: 271 

TOPIC: 28-5-2016 

Nowadays  young  people  are  admiring 
media  and  sports  stars,  even  though  they 
do not set a good example. 

Do  you  think  this  is  a  positive  or  negative 
development? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Media  and  sport  celebrities:  Người  nổi 

tiếng trên truyền hình hoặc thể thao 

2. Role models: Hình tượng (tạm dịch) 

3. Famous  entertainment  stars:  Những 

ngôi sao nổi tiếng trong ngành giải trí 

4. Changing  patterns  of 

fashion  and 

behavior:  Thay  đổi  cách  ăn  mặc  và  cư 

xử 

5. Show a propensity for: Có xu hướng cho 

cái gì 

6. Value  the  beauty  and  elegance  of 

clothes: Trân trọng vẻ đẹp và sự lịch lãm 

của trang phục 

7. Reverence for celebrities in  the field of 

entertainment: Sự hâm hộ những người 

nổi tiếng trong ngành giải trí 

8. Cause  irritation  for  the  locals:  Gây  nên 

sự khó chịu cho người địa phương 

9. Sugar-coat: Nói giảm 

10. 

Idolize  media 

and 

sport 

celebrated  individuals:  Hâm  mộ  những 

cá  nhân  nổi  tiếng  trên  truyền  hình  và 

thể thao 

1
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 4—6 -2016   

It is suggested that everyone should have a 
car, a TV and a fridge. 

Do the advantages of this development for 
society outweigh the disadvantages? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. An  item  of  some  fundamental  needs: 

Vật dụng đáp ứng nhu cầu cơ bản 

2. The  availability  of 

their  personal 
vehicle:  Sự  sẵn  có  của  phương  tiện  cá 
nhân 

3. A perfect choice of recreation: Lựa chọn 

giải trí hoàn hảo 

4. In possession of a fridge: Sở hữu một tủ 

lạnh 

5. Private  form  of  transport:  Loại  hình  di 

chuyển cả nhân 

6. The  growth  in  customers’  demand:  Sự 

gia tăng của nhu cầu khách hàng 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Some  people  believe  that  it  is  necessary  for  each  person  to 
possess an 
travelling, 
item  of  some  fundamental  needs for 
entertainment  and  food  storage.  Although  some  clear  benefits  of 
such development could be seen, they are, in my view, eclipsed by 
the considerable drawbacks. 

There are several advantages of having a private car, TV and fridge. 
First  of  all,  people  who  need  to  travel  on  a  daily  basis,  especially 
those  who  live  far  away  from  workplace,  could  stay  active  all  the 
time thanks to the availability of their personal vehicle. Secondly, 
having  a  TV  could  be a  perfect  choice  of  recreation because  it 
offers  a  variety  of  channels,  such  as  Cartoon  Network  or  HBO,  to 
satisfy  viewers’  personal  preferences.  Finally,  when in  possession 
of  a  fridge,  people  would  save  a  significant  amount  of  time 
supposedly spent on shopping for food. 

However, the disadvantages of those personal possessions are much 
greater regarding both environmental and individual levels. To start 
with,  hypothetically  if  everyone  had  his  own private  form  of 
transport, particularly cars, the emission of harmful exhaust which 
would  be  too  difficult  to  measure  would  do  grave  harm  to  the 
environment. From an individual perspective, it would cost a legacy 
if every person insisted on purchasing his own fridge and TV. This 
is  because  property  prices  would  certainly  accelerate  owing  to the 
growth  in  customers’  demand for  those  commodities.  Also  of 
great  concern  is  the  payment  of  expensive  electric  bills  as  fridges 
have to be plugged in all the time. 

In conclusion, despite a few beneficial aspects of having a car, a TV 
and  a  fridge,  the  demerits  are  of  greater  significance  from  both 
individual and environmental angles. 

Word count: 277 

2
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 16 – 6 – 2016  

Most  large  companies  nowadays  operate 
multi-nationally.  

To  what  extent  multinational  companies 
have 
local 
communities in which they operate? 

responsibility 

toward 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Reducing 

unemployment 

and 

improving  standards  of  living:  giảm 

thất nghiệp và cải thiện mức sóng 

2. The distribution of social benefits: Phân 

phát phúc lợi xã hội 

3. Take  any 

further  obligation 

for 

providing 

support 

for 

local 

communities:  Có  trách  nhiệm  bắt  buộc 

giúp đỡ cộng đồng 

4. Survive in this competitive world:  Sống 

sót trong thế giới cạnh tranh 

5. Ameliorate  local  living  standards:  Cải 

thiện mức sống của vùng xung quanh 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

These  days,  many  major  enterprises  are  expanding  their  market 
overseas.  Personally,  I  disagree  that  those  enterprises  have  any 
responsibility to aid local people. 

local 

Firstly, the appearance of foreign companies in numerous countries 
already  enhances  employment  in  the  neighborhood.  For  example, 
when  Apple  established  new  showrooms  or  retail  stores  in  Hanoi, 
job  seekers  were  employed,  reducing 
hundreds  of 
unemployment  and  improving  standards  of  living.  Furthermore, 
multi-national  companies  contribute 
local 
community by paying taxes to the state through the tax system. This 
amount  of  money  will  be  spent  on  the  distribution  of  social 
benefits  such  as  medical  care  or  education  services.  Therefore,  it 
would  be  unreasonable  for  those  companies  to  take  any  further 
obligation  for  providing  support  for  local  communities  where 
they base their offices.  

tremendously 

to 

Secondly, the idea of overseas companies sacrificing a proportion of 
their  profit  to  help  local  people,  although  preferred  by  some,  is 
absurd  because  it  is  the  responsibility  of  local  authorities  or  the 
government  of  that  country.  They  should  learn  to  deal  with  their 
own  domestic  problems,  instead  of  calling  for  help  from  overseas 
companies.  Furthermore,  those  organizations  have  to  make  money 
to  survive  in  this  competitive  world.  If  a  part  of  their  revenue  is 
given  to  charity  groups,  for  example,  to  ameliorate  local  living 
standards,  their  priority  goal  will  not  be  fulfilled,  leading  to  their 
retreat and a great loss to the community.  

In  conclusion,  the  operation  of  large  enterprises  from  wealthy 
nations in less developed countries naturally sparks several positive 
changes  in  local  life,  and  it  is  not  their  obligation  to  help  people 
living around. 

Word count: 262 

3
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

The  unpopularity  of  using  bicycle  in  numerous  places  has  been 
brought into question although there is little doubt about its friendly 
effects  on  the  environment  compared  to  cars  or  airplanes.  The 
reasons  for  this  are  varied  and  several  feasible  solutions  would  be 
proposed in the essay below. 

There are two main underlying explanations for the uncommon use 
of bicycles. Firstly, it would consume a considerable amount of time 
to  travel  by  this  means  of  transport,  which,  according  to  many, 
justifies  the  price  of  potential  environmental  damage  caused  by 
other  types  of vehicles. This  is  because it fails to benefit dwellers 
of  major  cities  in  particular when  their  pace  of  working  life 
would eclipse  the  values  of  using  bicycles  to  the  environment. 
Secondly,  modern  people  are  becoming  less  concerned  about  the 
negative impact that their daily use of cars and public transportation 
would 
is rather 
impractical  to  expect  cycling in  cities,  or  even  the  countryside.  

their  surroundings.  Therefore, 

inflict  on 

it 

The  government  play  a  vital  role  in  encouraging the  use  of  this 
environmentally  friendly  vehicle.  They  could  conduct monthly 
green  days that  by  law  require  citizens  to  cycle  to  work  to  get 
people  involved  in  protecting  their  environment.  In  the  long  term, 
such  an  initiative  would  help  to  gradually form  a  habit  of 
cycling among occupied individuals. More importantly, propagation 
via  various  means  of  media  along  with  optional  courses  about  the 
advantages  of  cycling  to  the  environment  at  schools  seem  to  be 
this  matter. 
imperative 

social  awareness  of 

to  heighten 

In  conclusion,  cycling,  regardless  of  its  positive  influences  on  the 
environment,  has  become  a  rare  picture  in  the  modern  world  for  a 
number  of  reasons;  and  the  government  should  take  immediate 
actions to improve this situation. 

TOPIC: 18-6-2016  

Cycling  is  more  environmentally  friendly 
than other forms of transport.  

Why is it not popular in many places? 

And how to increase its popularity? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. The  uncommon  use  of  bicycles:  Sự  sử 

dụng không phổ biến của xe đạp 

2. To fail to benefit major city dwellers in 

particular:  Không  có  lợi  ích  với  những 

người sống ở thành phố lớn 

3. To  eclipse  the  values  of  using  bicycles 

to  the environment:  Che lấp  những  giá 

trị của việc  sử dụng xe đạp  đối  với  môi 

trường 

4. To  be  rather  impractical  to  expect 

cycling:  Khá  là  phi  thực  tế  để  hi  vọng 

mọi người sẽ dùng xe đạp 

5. The use of this environmentally friendly 

vehicle: Việc sử dụng  phương tiện  thân 

thiện với môi trường 

6. Monthly green days: Những ngày vì môi 

trường hàng tháng 

7. Form  a  habit  of  cycling:  Tạo  thói  quen 

Word count: 286 

dùng xe đạp 

4
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

It  is  said  that  state  money  should  be  better  allocated  to  the 
promotion of a healthy lifestyle as a long-term prevention against all 
kinds  of  diseases  than  treatment  for  already  ill  people.  In  my 
opinion, both should be equally funded. 

On the one hand, the government should pay attention to promoting 
a  healthy  lifestyle  as  it  is  directly  linked  to  human  resistance 
against a vast number of illnesses. As a matter of fact, the harmful 
habit of drinking liquor or chemical dependency are principal causes 
for  numerous  diseases  including  alcoholism  and  cancer.  Also, 
people leading a sedentary  lifestyle due to  either intense study or 
work  also  suffer  from  back  pain  or  short-sight.  In  most  cases, 
victims are little aware of their daily habits bringing much damage 
to  their  body,  or  sometimes,  students  and  working  people  cannot 
find a place to exercise. The government’s involvement is therefore 
vital as they can launch propagation campaigns to heighten social 
awareness or establish more public facilities such as parks as places 
for residents to physically exercise.  

On  the  other  hand,  similar  funding  should  be  provided  for 
constructing  hospitals,  modernizing  facilities,  and  experimenting 
new  medicines.  In  reality,  there  are  more  grave  threats  from 
contagions  like  Ebola  or  unexpected  accidents  on  street,  which 
emphasizes  the  necessity  of  treatment  and  the  development  of 
healthcare  services.  Unless  more  significant  amounts  of  money 
were allocated  to discovering new cures and improving the quality 
of services, there would be more victims and casualties. This is  no 
less important and imperative than promoting a healthy lifestyle.  

In  conclusion,  both  of  these  aforementioned  factors  should  be 
equally and simultaneously developed by any governments. 

Word count: 271 

TOPIC: 25-6-2016 

It  is  more  important  for  governments  to 
spend public funds on promoting a healthy 
lifestyle than treatment.  

Do you agree or disagree? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Human 

resistance  against  a  vast 

number  of  illnesses:  Sức  chống  lại  rất 

nhiều bệnh tật 

2. Leading  a  sedentary  lifestyle:  có  lối 

sống ít vận động  

3. Launch  propagation  campaigns 

to 

heighten  social  awareness:  Thực  hiện 

những chiến dịch tuyên truyền nâng cao 

nhận thức xã hội 

4. The  necessity  of  treatment  and  the 

development of healthcare services: Sự 

cần thiết của sự điều trị và sự phát triển 

của dịch vụ chăm sóc sức khỏe 

5. No 

less 

important  and 

imperative: 

không  kém  phần  quan  trọng  và  cấp 

bách 

5
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 9-7-2016 

Studies have suggested that children watch 
much more television than they did in the 
past  and  spend  less  time  on  active  or 
creative things.  

What  are  the  reasons  and  what  measures 
should  be  taken  to  reduce  the  time 
children  spend  on  watching  TV  and 
encourage children to spend more time on 
active or creative things? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. High-resolution  graphics:  Hình  ảnh 

phân giải cao 

2. The 

lack  of 

care  as  well  as 

encouragement  from  parents:  Sự  thiếu 

quan tâm cũng như khuyến khích từ phụ 

huynh 

3. Restrict the amount of time allowed for 

watching  TV:  Giới  hạn  thời  gian  được 

phép xem phim 

4. Resort  to  drastic  measures:  Dụng  đến 

những biện pháp quyết liệt 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

It has been observed that watching TV becomes a dominant form of 
recreation  over  other  activities  that  require  creativity.  My  essay 
below  will  analyze  some  underlying  reasons  and  propose  some 
feasible solutions to this issue.  

There  are  two  major  contributors  to  the  situation  where  children 
show  a  tendency  to  spend  time  watching  TV  rather  than  creative 
activities.  The  first explanation is  that  telecasts  have  been growing 
in  number  as  well  as  quality,  which  greatly  appeals  to  children  at 
young  age.  Compared  to the  past  when  most  TV  channels  were  in 
black  and  white, or  viewers could only  switch to a limited number 
of  programs, nowadays hundreds of channels  with  high-resolution 
graphics  are  available  on  TV.  It  is  therefore  understandable  why 
children choose watching channels like Cartoon Network over other 
activities.  The  second  reason  is  the  lack  of  care  as  well  as 
encouragement  from  parents.  Busy  life  has  pushed  modern 
parents away from their kids, and they hardly have time to play with 
their children or encourage them to do some healthier activities like 
painting.  Children,  as  a  consequence,  turn  to  watching  TV  during 
their spare time.  

Measures should be taken in order to reduce the time children use to 
watch TV. Parents’ guidance  are essential since they are closest to 
their own children and it is easier for parents to restrict the amount 
of  time  allowed for  watching  TV.  Although schools  and  teachers 
can  also  play  a  part,  fathers  and  mothers  would  be  far  more 
persuasive  and  could  resort  to  drastic  measures  such  as  corporal 
punishments if needed. Also of great importance is that they should 
spare more time playing with and encouraging their kids to take part 
in creative  activities. In  fact, with enough encouragement, children 
would feel motivated and cared for, hence more time spent on active 
exercises.  

In  conclusion,  several  factors  are  cited  as  causes  for  children’s 
propensity  for  adopting  a  passive  habit  of  watching  TV  more  than 
ever  before,  and  children  should  be  guided  and  encouraged  to  do 
more creative work. 

Word count: 335 

6
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

These  days,  people  are  buying  a  lot  of  food  which  ends  up  being 
thrown away. The essay below will analyze some major reasons for 
this situation, and measures to tackle this problem will be presented. 

There are two main explanations why food is being wasted. One of 
the reasons food is thrown away is because consumers fail to have a 
thorough  plan  of  what  they  are  going  to  buy  before  they  shop. 
Commonly, many people only have vague ideas of what meals or 
foodstuffs  they  might  consume  over  the  next  few  days,  and  this 
often leads to their shopping carts full of products they might never 
use.  Secondly,  food  wastage  can  occur  when  people  make  poor 
choices  for  their  diet.  Huge  quantities  of  food  remaining  unused 
might be a sign that consumers’ diets are going undesirably.  

Some measures are suggested to mitigate the situation. One effective 
solution  is  to  make  a  list  of  ingredients  and  foodstuffs  that  one  is 
going  to  purchase  before  she  goes  shopping.  This  way  helps 
consumers to have time to prepare and decide wisely what products 
should  be  bought,  which  eventually  saves  a  lot  of  unnecessary 
food. Furthermore, people should do careful research on reasonable 
diets in advance of going to food stores so that they can know what 
ingredients are best for their state of health.  

In  conclusion,  poor  planning  for  meals  and  unwise  choices  of  diet 
mainly contribute to the amount of unused food at the moment, and 
thorough preparation is key to avoid further food wastage.  

TOPIC: 14-7-2016 

Nowadays,  it  seems  that  people  tend  to 
waste a great amount of food.  

Why  do  you  think  this  is  happening?  And 
how can we solve this problem? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Have a thorough plan of what they are 

going  to  buy:  Có  kê  hoạch  cẩn  thận  về 

những gì họ định mua 

2. Vague 

ideas  of  what  meals  or 

foodstuffs  they  might  consume:  Ý 

tưởng  mờ  nhạt  về  bữa  ăn  hay  thức  ăn 

mà họ định tiêu thụ 

3. Poor  choices  for  their  diet:  Những  lựa 

chọn tệ cho chế độ ăn của họ 

4. Saves  a  lot  of  unnecessary  food:  Tiết 

kiệm  rất  nhiều  thực  phẩm  không  cần 

thiết  

Word count: 253 

7
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 16-7-2016 

In  many  countries,  government  spent  a 
large  amount  of  money  on 
improving 
internet access.  

Why is it happening  and do you think  it  is 
the  most  appropriate  use  of  government 
money? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. A  huge  proportion  of  national  budget: 

Một phần lớn ngân sách nhà nước 

2. To  dispense  educational  services  and 

general knowledge about all aspects of 

life: đem đến những dịch vụ giáo dục và 

kiến thức chung về tất cả các khía cạnh 

của cuộc sống 

3. To pour their money into improving the 

Internet: Đổ tiền vào nâng cấp Internet 

4. To  be  equivalent  to  the  enormous 

amount  of  governmental  funding:  Cân 

xứng với khối lượng kinh phí khổng lồ từ 

chính phủ 

5. To  be  used  to  the  absence  of  the 

Internet:  Quen  với  việc  không  có 

Internet 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

A  huge  proportion  of  national  budget is  allocated  for  providing 
people with  easier access to the  Internet. There are several reasons 
for such spending and, in my view, this is not the most suitable way 
to use state money. 

in dispensing  educational 

The  government  understand  how  the  Internet  benefits  the  lives  of 
their  citizens  and  also  the  limitation  of  access  to  the  network  in  a 
number  of  places  across  their  countries.  The  Internet  has  proven 
services  and  general 
powerful 
knowledge about all aspects of life, not to mention the fact that it 
could facilitate communication even between continents. There is no 
arguing why governments pay much heed to the development of the 
network, just as to boost the overall quality of life for their people. 
Additionally,  perhaps  the  inaccessibility  of  the  Internet  in  many 
areas, especially disadvantaged ones for which mountainous villages 
in  Vietnam  could  be  brought  up  as  a  prime  example,  has  the 
government  draw  a  conclusion 
into 
improving the Internet. 

to pour  their  money 

Much as those analyzed points above, I still believe large financial 
spending on such a field could, sometimes, be seen as unproductive 
or  even  counter-productive.  In  fact,  only  half  of  the  world 
population has Internet connection; and even if the government were 
able to expand the network, it would be, I believe, hardly reachable 
for the rest of the world for the time being. The result would not be 
equivalent  to  the  enormous  amount  of  governmental  funding. 
Instead, there are some other areas that authorities could invest in as 
a pre-requisite complement before supplying a widespread network. 
Constructing schools and sending qualified teachers to areas that are 
used to the absence of the Internet and are unaware of the benefits 
it might offer could be more promising. 

In  conclusion,  there  are  two  main  explanations  for  governments’ 
special attention to improving the Internet access; and I think this is 
not the most optimal way to spend money. 

Word count: 322 

8
2

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

As  the  world  progresses,  the  gap  between  the two  classes  of 
society is widened because the rich become wealthier while the poor 
are living  on  the  breadline.  Such income  inequality could  lead to 
several  problems,  and  some  suggestions  to  improve  this  situation 
essay. 
will 

following 

analyzed 

the 

be 

in 

Wealth concentration within a handful of individuals and institutions 
might  result  in  two  major  issues.  Firstly,  the  rich-poor  gap  could 
be the breeding ground for social unrest and political instability. 
The  poor  might  perceive  that  the  rich  is  the  principal  force  of 
hindrance  to  their  occupational  and  service  opportunities.  This 
might  be  the  precursor  to  discontentment,  which  potentially  is the 
onset of social anarchy. Secondly, as poverty restricts the capacity 
of  the  underprivileged  to  access  services  and  other  life-sustaining 
matters  such  as  education,  employment  and  medicine,  they 
might resort  to  violence  and  opt  for  the  life  of  criminals.  

to  reduce  economic 

There  are  several  initiatives 
inequality, 
including  progressive  taxation  and  minimum  salary  legislation. 
Higher  taxes  should be  levied on the rich, which could reduce the 
amount  of  income  inequality  in  society.  On  the  other  hand, 
governments could use this money to supply free goods and services 
for those who struggle to make a living. Also of great importance is 
the  increase  in  the  minimum  earnings  of  the  poorest  workers. 
Although  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  current  system places  much 
importance  on  individual  competence to  determine  the amount 
of  money  one  might  earn,  unskilled  workforce  who  usually  are 
from  the  lower  class  should  be,  still,  provided  enough  to  live 
sufficiently. 

In conclusion, chaos and the acceleration of crime rates are the two 
severe  repercussions  of  the  unequal  distribution  of  wealth;  and 
governments could impose heavy taxes on the rich and heighten the 
minimum amount of salary for the disadvantaged. 

Word count: 298 

9
2

e
g
a
P

TOPIC: 30-7-2016 

Many people say the gap between rich and 
poor  people 
is  wider,  as  rich  people 
become  richer  and  poor  people  grow 
poorer.  

What  problems  could  this  situation  cause 
and what measures can be done to address 
those problems? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. The two classes of society: 2 tầng lớp xã 

hội 

2. To  live  on  the  breadline:  Sống  nghèo 

đói 

3. Income  inequality:  Bất  bình  đẳng  thu 

nhập 

4. The  breeding  ground  for  social  unrest 

and political instability: Là nơi sản sinh 

ra rối loạn xã hội và bất ổn chính trị 

5. The onset of social anarchy: Sự bắt đầu 

của sự hỗn độn trong xã hội 

6. To resort to violence and opt for the life 

of  criminals:  Tìm  đến  bạo  lực  và  lựa 

chọn con đường tội phạm 

7. To  reduce  the  amount  of 

income 

inequality  in  society:  Giảm  lượng  bất 

bình đẳng thu nhập trong xã hội 

8. To 

place  much 

importance  on 

individual  competence  to  determine 

the  amount of  money  one  might  earn: 

Nhấn  mạnh  vào  khả  năng  cá  nhân  để 

quyết  định  số  tiền  mà  một  người  sẽ 

nhận 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 4-8-2016 

In  many  countries,  people  now  wear 
Western  clothes  (suits,  jeans)  rather  than 
traditional clothing.  

Is  this  a  positive  or  negative 

Why? 
development? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Influential cultures: Những nền văn hóa 

có ảnh hưởng lớn 

2. The  notion  of  modernism  in  terms  of 
dressing:  Ý  niệm  về  cách  ăn  mặc  hiện 
đại  

3. Reshapes 

fashion  patterns  of 

the 
indigenous:  Định  hình  lại  cách  ăn  mặc 
của người bản xứ 

4. The age of globalization:  Thời đại toàn 

cầu hóa 

5. Underestimate  the  value  and  meaning 

of  their  traditional  clothes:  Coi  thường 

giá  trị  và  ý  nghĩa  của  quần  áo  truyền 

thống 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

In  many  parts  of  the  world,  many  people  prefer  Western  fashion 
styles than their traditional clothes. The underlying reasons for this 
are varied; and this could be seen as both negative and positive.  

There are two main explanations for the popularity of suits and jeans 
even  in  non-Western  countries  across  different  continents.  Firstly, 
Western clothing has become widely known for the recent advent of 
the  mass  media  like  TV  or  global  newspapers.  In  fact,  influential 
cultures,  especially  the  notion  of  modernism  in  terms  of 
dressing,  from  the  West  has  become  dominant  in  other  nations. 
Secondly, the transcontinental expansion of powerful Western-based 
corporations  is  another  contributor  to  the  preference  for  this  so-
called  modern  dressing  style.  Those  organizations  usually  require 
their  local  staff  to  wear  dress  shirts  and  pants  to  work,  which 
gradually reshapes fashion patterns of the indigenous.  

This choice of fashion could do both harm and good. On the positive 
side, it helps people integrate into the global working environment, 
which  is  essential  in  the  age  of  globalization  where  different 
cultures  cross.  On  the  other  hand,  if  such  preference  became 
excessively prevalent, there would be a good reason for the worry of 
cultural  assimilation.  Some  people,  the  young  generation  in 
particular,  might  underestimate  the  value  and  meaning  of  their 
traditional clothes, the Ao Dai in Vietnam for example. 

In conclusion, the widespread adoption of Western clothing could be 
attributable  to  the  mass  media  and  the  appearance  of  a  handful  of 
national companies; and this phenomenon is positive and negative at 
the same time.  

Word count: 253 

0
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 27-8-2016  

the 

rapid 

advancement 

technology,  eg 

of 
With 
communication 
smart 
phones,  tablets  and  other  mobile  devices, 
some 
the 
disadvantages  outweigh  the  advantages. 
To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

believe 

people 

that 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Empowered  people  to  conveniently 

keep 

in 

touch  with 

friends  and 

relatives: Giúp con người có thể giữ liên 

lạc  với  bạn  bè  và  người  thân  một  cách 

tiện lợi 

2. The  ability  to  effectively  interact  with 

each  other:  Khả  năng  tương  tác  hiệu 

quả với nhau 

3. Refrain  from  using  new  appealing 

applications  and  games:  Kiềm  chế  sử 

dụng những ứng dụng và trò chơi thú vị 

4. Too engrossed in their games: quá đắm 

chìm vào việc chơi game 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Recently, the advent and popularity of cutting-edge communication 
technology  has  unfolded  the  possibility  of  connecting  people  from 
different places around the world, which engenders public opposing 
ideas  of  whether  the  drawbacks  of  such  devices  would  eclipse  the 
benefits.  In  my  opinion,  I  completely  agree  with  that  statement. 

Still,  there  are  certainly  several  values  that  new  lines  of  mobile 
phones  and  tablets  bring  to  users.  Firstly,  those  are  considered  a 
powerful facilitator of communication. In fact, many breakthroughs 
in  the  industry  of  technology,  such  as  the  introduction  of  I-phone, 
have  empowered  people  to  conveniently  keep  in  touch  with 
friends  and  relatives  regardless  of  geographic  adversities. 
Secondly,  such  technological  development  is  a  threshold  of  a  new 
world  where  people  are  connected  in  a  global  network,  which 
provides  them  with  opportunities  to  meet  people  of  diverse 
backgrounds  and  personalities.  Compared  to  the  past,  modern 
people  now  could  easily  get 
to  know  people,  even  trans-
continentally, with only a small device such as a cell phone. 

However,  I  suppose  that  the  repercussions  of  this  advancement 
should be paid more attention to. As people rely too much on tablets 
or mobile phones, there would be a high chance of them losing the 
ability  to  effectively  interact  with  each  other  in  real  life.  More 
dangerously, addiction and aggression might be the price that people 
had  to  pay  if  they  did  not  refrain  from  using  new  appealing 
applications and games. Unfortunately, many incidents resulting in 
a few casualties have been reported when players are too engrossed 
in  their  games,  especially  after  the  release  of  Pokemon-Go.  This 
might  be  a  strong  basis  for  the  belief  that  those  devices  would  do 
more harm than good. 

In  conclusion,  I  believe  that  the  downsides  of  contemporary 
technological  development  might  be  more  significant  than  the 
benefits. 

Word count: 293 

1
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

There are different opinions about the role of history in our present 
life. While a lot of people insist that there would be nothing to gain 
from doing research on what happened in the past, I suppose history 
does teach us precious lessons.  

On the one hand, I understand why some people think it is pointless 
to learn from the past. First, history is the field that is rarely used in 
people’s  lives,  and  therefore,  they  would  rather  pay  attention  to 
science  or  technology  than  focus  on  something  that  brings  no 
relevant  values  to  the  present  or  future.  Second,  each  historical 
event  is  interpreted  differently  based  on  different  facts  and 
perspectives,  so  there  is  no  guarantee  of  the  accuracy  of 
information obtained. If, in many cases, historical documents were 
falsified, it would cause tremendous damage to people’s culture and 
religion.  

On the other hand, I would argue that studying from past events is 
essential for two principal reasons. History helps young people have 
thorough insights into their own culture and how their country 
has evolved. This is particularly true in case of Vietnam. The youth 
need to understand how their ancestors defended the nation against 
intruders  throughout  many  dynasties  and  maintain  a  sovereign  and 
free  country,  which  would  develop  their  patriotism  and  pride. 
Furthermore,  history  depicts  the  mistakes  made  in  the  past,  hence 
helping people to avoid similar ones in the future.  

In  conclusion,  acquiring  knowledge  about  historical  events, 
although redundant according to some, seems to be of great value to 
me. 

Word count: 252 

TOPIC: 10-9-2016 

Some people think studying from the past 
offers  no  benefits  to  today's  life,  while 
others  believe  that  history  is  a  valuable 
source of information for us.  

Discuss  both  views  and  give  our  own 
opinion. 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. brings  no  relevant  values  to  the 

present or future: Không đem lại giá trị 

thực tiến cho hiện tại và tương lai 

2. no  guarantee  of  the  accuracy  of 

information obtained: Không có gì đảm 

bảo về sự chính xác của thông tin 

3. thorough 

insights 

into 

their  own 

culture  and  how  their  country  has 

evolved: Kiến thức cụ thể về văn hóa và 

nước nhà đã tiến hóa như thế nào 

4. develop  their  patriotism  and  pride: 

Phát triển lòng yêu nước và sự tự hào  

2
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 15-9-2016 

smoking.  Therefore, 

Research  has  shown  that  overeating  is  as 
harmful  as 
the 
advertising of certain food products should 
be  banned 
in  the  same  way  as  the 
advertising of cigarettes is banned.  

Do you agree or disagree? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. A  detriment 

to  people’s  health 

conditions:  Điều  gây  hại  cho  sức  khỏe 

con người 

2. Excessive  food  intake:  Lượng  thức  ăn 

vào quá nhiều 

3. Numerous  health-related  problems: 

Nhiều vấn đề liên quan đến sức khỏe 

4. Approach  prospective  customers:  Tiếp 

cận khách hàng tiềm năng 

5. Their  profit  declines  as  a  result  of  this 

prohibition  policy:  Lợi  nhuận  giảm  vì 

cấm sách này 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

It is claimed that overeating causes similar damage to human health 
just  like  smoking,  so  it  is  necessary  to  implement  prohibition  of 
advertisements  for  both  some  food  products  and  smoking.  In  my 
opinion, the former view is well-founded, yet the latter seems to be 
rather unreasonable.  

It  is  totally  understandable  that  consuming  an  unnecessarily  large 
amount  of  food  is  a  detriment  to  people’s  health  conditions  just 
like  smoking  is.  In  fact,  excessive  food  intake  increases  body  fat, 
potentially resulting in obesity. In recent years, the number of obese 
people  has  been  constantly  growing  at  an  unprecedented  rate  in 
consequence of overeating. Furthermore, consuming unhealthy food 
such  as  fast  food  or  processed  food  on  regular  basis  also  brings 
about  numerous  health-related  problems  such  as  blood  pressure 
or high cholesterol. Issues regarding people’s state of health caused 
by  eating  too  much  are  for  sure  comparable  with  those  caused  by 
smoking, lung cancer for example. 

is  their  main  measure 

However,  I  do  not  think  it  is  an  effective  solution  to  forbid 
advertisements  for  several  particular  foodstuffs.  It  is  unfair  to 
manufacturers  because  advertising 
to 
approach  prospective  customers  and  to  introduce  their  new 
products  in  the  market.  Without  publicity  materials,  many  food 
manufacturers would experience crises as their profit declines as a 
result of this prohibition policy. Furthermore, it is a disadvantage 
to consumers because they will not be informed about products they 
want to buy. It is true that advertising encourages people to purchase 
things  but  it  only  plays  a  small  part  in  the  amount  of  food  intake 
which is mainly determined by consumers themselves.  

In conclusion, I agree that the way overeating harms human health is 
similar to smoking, whereas it seems to me that advertising of food 
products should not be banned. 

Word count: 291 

3
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Governments  across  continents  have  turned  their  attention  to  more 
sustainable  sources  of  energy  as  alternatives  to  fossil  fuels.  In  my 
opinion, this could be seen as a progress for the following reasons. 

First,  there  is  no  arguing  that  producing  energy  from  buried  dead 
organisms  lacks sustainability, which means  such production could 
not  guarantee the survival  of  humans  in  the  long  term.  In  fact,  the 
consumption  of  energy  generated  from  fossil  fuels  tends  to 
accelerate  in  direct  correlation  with  the  growth  of  the  world 
population.  With  the  current  rate  of  exploitation,  this  valuable 
resource  would  dwindle  away in  no time,  leaving no other choices 
than  seeking  additional  reserves  such  as  nuclear  power  or 
hydroelectricity.  This  is  a  safe  solution  to  the  fear  of  energy 
scarcity and ensures the future development of the human race. 

Second,  dependence  on  fossil  fuel  for  worldwide  energy  supply 
would cause environmental degradation while using solar power, 
for  example, 
is  considered  an  ultimate  choice  of  energy 
conservation.  The  combustion  of  fossil  fuels  is  the  culprit  of 
greenhouse  gas  emission  and  other  air  pollutants,  leading  to 
tremendous damage to the environment. Such suffering of the Earth 
could not be justified by the growing need of humans. By contrast, 
this would never be the case when it comes to other alternatives as 
mentioned  above.  If  governments  continue  to  invest  in  exploiting 
those  new  sources,  there  will  be  an  unlimited  amount  of 
inexpensive energy on the long run. 

In conclusion, I believe that the use of other potential energy sources 
to replace fossil fuel is obviously an important step forward. 

Word count: 260 

TOPIC: 24-9-2016 

Fossil fuel is the main source of energy. In 
some  countries,  the  use  of  alternative 
sources of energy is encouraged. 

To what extent do you think is it a positive 
or negative development? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. The current rate of exploitation: Tốc độ 

khai thác hiện nay 

2. Energy scarcity: Khan hiếm năng lượng 

3. The  future  development  of  the  human 

race:  Sự  phát  triển  trong  tương  lai  của 

loài người 

4. Environmental  degradation:  Sự  thoái 

hóa của môi trường 

5. The  combustion  of  fossil  fuels:  Sự  đốt 

cháy năng lượng hóa thạch 

6. An  unlimited  amount  of  inexpensive 

energy:  Một  lượng  bất  tận năng  lượng 

rẻ 

4
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC: 8-10-2016 

Some  people  think  that  men  and  women 
have  different  qualities.  Therefore,  some 
certain jobs are suitable for men and some 
jobs are suitable for women.  

To what extent do you agree or disagree? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Disparities 

in 

types  of 

job 
the 
compatible  for  males  or  females:  sự 
phân  biệt  trong  loại  công  việc  tương 
thích với đàn ông và phụ nữ 

2. Distinct physical and mental strengths: 
Những điểm mạnh khác biệt về thể chất 
và tinh thần 

3. The  distribution  of  the  types  of  jobs 
among  the  two  sexes:  Sự  phân  bố  các 
loại  công  việc  giữa  những  người  khác 
giới 

4. Occupational  compatibility  regarding 
gender:  Sự  tương  thích  nghề  nghiệp 
dựa trên giới tính 

5. Great  versatility  in  various  jobs:  Khả 
năng  có  thể  đảm  nhiệm  tốt  nhiều  loại 
công việc 

6. Both  brains  and  brawn:  Cả  trí  não  lẫn 

thể chất 

7. Gender-specific  career  pursuit:  Sự  theo 
đuổi nghề nghiệp tùy theo giới tính (tạm 
dịch…) 

8. The  aforementioned  disparity  in  job 
selection:  Sự  phân  biệt  trong  việc  chọn 
lựa ngành nghề vừa đề cập đến ở trên 

Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

It  is  thought  that  there  are disparities  in  the  types  of  job 
compatible for  males  or  females  owing  to their distinct  physical 
and  mental  strengths. Although  occupational  suitability  based  on 
gender  is  justifiable  to  some  degree,  reality,  in  my  opinion,  has 
proven otherwise. 

On  the  one  hand,  it  would  be  absurd  to  ignore  the  fact  that  jobs 
which  require  tremendous  physical  strength  and  agility  such  as 
mining  feature  male  labor.  Women,  meanwhile, are assumed  to be 
better  at  tasks  that  take  great  patience  as  well  as  skills  to  perform 
like household chores. In fact, a majority of men and women could 
not  exchange  their  preferred  fields  of  expertise,  which  is  a  strong 
reason  for  the  distribution  of the  types  of  jobs  among  the  two 
sexes.  

On  the  other  hand,  I  still  believe  there  should  not  be  any  specific 
rules  for occupational  compatibility  regarding  gender. A  lot  of 
men  are  growing  more  interested  in  taking  responsibilities  for 
childcare  and  housework  which  are  typically  considered  feminine. 
Women,  by  contrast,  are  showing great  versatility  in  various 
jobs, even  those  demanding both  brains  and  brawn. Female 
gymnasts have been increasing in number; and nobody can deny that 
mental  and  physical  perseverance  are  fundamental  for  gymnastics. 
In addition, women’s social status has been improved thanks to the 
success  of  world-class  businesswomen  and  politicians,  Hillary 
Clinton  for  example.  This  is  a  plain  proof  against  the  belief 
of gender-specific career pursuit.  

In conclusion, while there is still some truth to the aforementioned 
disparity in job selection, I think men and women are now equal in 
terms of such an aspect. 

Word count: 263 

5
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

It  is  thought  that  studying  at  university  is  everyone’s  right,  and  all 
tuition  fees  should  be  fully  paid  by  the  government.  The  former 
view is reasonable, however, I disagree that the government should 
take responsibility for students’ university education fees.  

I  believe  every  student  is  entitled  to  go  to  college  to  acquire 
tertiary degrees. It is because, from  my point of view, knowledge 
gained  at  university  should  be  freely  imparted  to  everyone. 
Furthermore,  all 
financial 
backgrounds,  are  equal  in  intelligence  and  scholastic  capability, 
hence equal opportunities to gain admittance to university.  

students,  although  different 

in 

However,  the  government  are  under  no  obligation  to  take  care  of 
university  attenders’  education  costs.  Providing  free  tertiary 
education  might  either  push  the  government  to  the  verge  of 
bankruptcy or levy higher taxes on citizens because the costs for the 
government  to  maintain  facilities  or  employ  qualified  teachers  are 
certainly  exorbitant.  Additionally,  education  quality  would  also 
suffer owing to the increased number of students in one class, which 
prevents  teachers  from  giving  out  thorough  care  for  everyone.  In 
fact, class size also exerts a fairly significant impact on how each 
student  interacts  with  teachers  and  their  peers.  If  there  are  too 
many members in one class, they will be afraid to ask questions, for 
example, which leads to their poor performance at university. 

TOPIC: 22-10-2016 

to  have  access 

Some  people  think  that  everyone  has  the 
right 
to  university 
education,  and  that  governments  should 
make  it  free  for  all  students  no  matter 
what financial background they have.  

To  what  extent  do  you  agree  or  disagree 
with this opinion. 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Acquire  tertiary  degrees:  Lấy  bằng  đại 

học 

2. Equal 

in 

intelligence  and  scholastic 

capability:  Giống  nhau  về  trí  tuệ  cũng 

như khả năng học vấn 

3. Providing free tertiary education:  Cung 

cấp giáo dục đại học miễn phí 

4. Exerts  a  fairly  significant  impact  on 

how  each  student 

interacts  with 

teachers and their peers: Có ảnh hưởng 

khá  đáng  kể  đến  việc  từng  học  sinh 

tương tác với nhau cũng như với thầy cô 

In  conclusion,  while  I  agree  that  it  is  everyone’s  right  to  pursue 
tertiary  education,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  government  should  not 
fully  pay  for  study  costs.  So  far,  there  have  been  ample 
opportunities for scholarships or exemptions; and I think that is the 
best method to support students.  

như thế nào. 

Word count: 268 

6
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

It is often argued that life in major urban areas has become much of 
a challenge.  Although  there is some  truth  to that statement, I think 
qualities of life in cities have made it easier for residents in terms of 
educational opportunities and career prospects.  

On the one hand, there are two principal reasons why some people 
find  it  difficult  to  live  in  a  metropolis.  First,  space  of  living  is 
becoming  more  and  more  limited  in  many  major  cities,  such  as 
London. Such overcrowding, which can be attributable to  not only 
population  explosion  but  also  migration  from  the  countryside, 
makes  it  uncomfortable  for  residents  in  many  terms,  public 
transportation  overload  for  example.  Second,  crime  rates  have 
been accelerating for the past few years in urban areas; and this is a 
tremendous detriment to the life and safety of city dwellers.  

On  the  other  hand,  I  would  side  with  those  who  suppose  living  in 
cities  is  easier  than  ever  before.  To  begin  with,  access  to  higher 
quality  education  has  been  largely  dispensed,  resulting  in  skilled 
workforce.  In  fact,  more  institutions  and  schools  have  come  into 
being  recently,  with teachers  carefully trained  and facilities greatly 
modernized, 
the  best  education. 
Furthermore, the non-stop progress of the economy is the foundation 
of  adequate  employment  opportunities.  Despite  significant 
competitiveness  in  the  job  market,  people  can  still  find  a  decent 
profession  equivalent  to  their  qualifications  and  competence, 
making their lives less stressful.  

to  provide  students  with 

 In conclusion, it seems to me that it is more comfortable to live in a 
to  advanced  education  systems  and  more 
big  city  owing 
employment opportunities.  

Word count: 266 

TOPIC: 5-11-2016 

Some people believe that living in big cities 
is  becoming  more  difficult.  Others  believe 
that it is getting easier.  

Discuss  both  views  and  give  your  own 
opinion. 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Not only population explosion but also 

migration  from  the  countryside:  Không 

chỉ bùng nổ dân số mà còn di cư từ nông 

thôn 

2. Public  transportation  overload:  Hiện 

trạng  quả  tải  phương  tiện  giao  thông 

công cộng 

3. Adequate  employment  opportunities: 

Đầy đủ cơ hội nghề nghiệp 

4. Find  a  decent  profession  equivalent  to 

their  qualifications  and  competence: 

Tìm được một ngành tốt xứng với bằng 

cấp và khả năng 

7
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

The  development  of  businesses  has  given  rise  to  the  growing 

number of advertisements that can be seen anywhere, on streets or in 

the  media.  In  my opinion, this phenomenon could  be both positive 

and negative.  

TOPIC: 26-11-2016 

On  the  one  hand,  advertising  has  brought  a number of  benefits for 

Advertisements  are  becoming  more  and 
more common in everyday life.  

Is it a positive or negative development? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1.  Details about newly launched products: 

Thông  tin  chi  tiết  về  những  sản  phẩm 

mới được công bố 

2.  Commercialize 

their 

commodities: 

Thương mại hóa sản phẩm 

not  only  consumers  but  also  businesses.  Certainly,  advertising 

provides  details  about  newly  launched  products,  which  is 

important for consumers who are still unaware of such products. In 

fact,  improving  quality  alone  would  be  less  effective  if  producers 

failed 

to  commercialize 

their  commodities.  Furthermore, 

companies, entrepreneurs for example, spend a great deal of money 

on  publicity  materials 

in  order 

to  approach  prospective 

customers.  This,  in  return,  generates  higher  profit  and  enhances 

3.  Publicity materials: Nghĩa là những thứ 

those companies’ competitiveness in the market. 

giúp cho một sản phẩm mới đươc người 

khác biết đến (tạm dịch) 

4.  Approach  prospective  customers:  Tiếp 

On  the  other  hand,  the  surge  in  quantities  of  commercials  exerts 

several  undesirable  impacts  on  customers.  First,  instead  of  being 

cận với khách hàng tiềm năng 

well-informed  about  a  new  line  of  product,  people  are  being 

5.  To  be  bombarded  with  all  kinds  of 

bombarded with all kinds of advertisements. Those can be either 

advertisements: Bị “bỏ bom” bởi đủ các 

deceptive or annoying; and such information overload has become 

thể loại quảng cáo 

6.  Information overload: Quá tải thông tin 

7.  Stimulate  people  to  purchase  products 

that  are  being  advertised:  Kích  thích 

mọi  người  mua  hàng  hóa  đang  được 

a nuisance to many people, particularly when their favorite telecasts 

are  constantly 

interrupted  by 

irrelevant  promotions.  Second, 

advertising  encourages  people  to  purchase  what  they  do  not  really 

need.  Images  of  celebrities  are  used 

in  many  extravagant 

quảng cáo.  

commercials, especially cosmetics, to stimulate people to purchase 

products  that  are  being  advertised.  However,  in  reality,  most  of 

those products are of little use to buyers.  

In  conclusion,  advertisements  of  various  types  have  become 

prevalent in modern society; and this is, in my view, advantageous 

and detrimental as well.         

Word count: 261 

8
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
Band 8 Sample 

Answer 

Travelling  abroad  certainly  exerts  several  positive  influences  on 
tourists  as  well  as  the  host  country.  Although  there  are  still 
drawbacks  of  international  travel,  I  think  its  values  are  more 
significant.  

On  the  one  hand,  the  downsides  of  welcoming  foreign  visitors  are 
varied.  Regarding  tourists  themselves,  travel  expenses  in  famous 
tourist  destinations,  Venice for  example,  are  expensive,  and there 
are  many  complicated  and  tedious  prerequisite procedures  such 
as  visa  application  or  plane  ticket  reservation.  As for the countries 
that play host to international tourists, the rise in costs of living may 
lay  much  pressure  on  local  people  and  be  a  detriment  to 
domestic  travel.  This  is  because  the  growth  in  the  number  of 
tourists  from  abroad  would  encourage  costs  of  hotel  rooms  and 
other services to increase. People in the neighborhood and domestic 
visitors would suffer in comparison.  

On  the  other  hand,  I  suppose  the  benefits  of  international  travel 
would  eclipse  those  analyzed  disadvantages.  First,  travelers  can 
have  numbers  of  fascinating  experiences  of  exotic  cuisine  and 
culture,  and  they  get  to  see  places  they  have  not  seen  before.  A 
typical example of this is when tourists from other countries come to 
Vietnam, they would have the opportunity to use chopsticks, enjoy 
traditional meals and go sightseeing in the countryside. Second, the 
increased number of foreign people coming to visit another country 
would  evidently  enhance  tourism  industries,  contributing  greatly 
to the  wealth  of  that  country.  If  tourists  enjoy  their  trips, they  will 
recommend  the  destination  to  their  friends  or  perhaps  they  will 
come back in the future.   

In  conclusion,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  merits  of  international 
tourism are more notable than its drawbacks.  

TOPIC: 3-12-2016 

International  travel  has  many  advantages 
to both travelers and the country visited.  

Do you think advantages outweigh 
disadvantages? 

Useful vocabulary: 

1.  Travel expenses: Chi phí du lịch  

2.  Famous  tourist  destinations:  Điểm  đến 

du lịch nổi tiếng 

3.  Complicated  and  tedious  prerequisite 

procedures:  Công  đoạn  bắt  buộc  nhàm 

chán và phức tạp 

4.  Lay much pressure on local people: Đặt 

nhiều áp lực lên người dân trong vùng 

5.  A  detriment  to  domestic  travel:  Ngăn 

cản du lịch trong nước 

6.  Costs  of  hotel 

rooms  and  other 

services: Giá cả của phòng khách sạn và 

những loại dịch vụ khác 

7.  Numbers  of  fascinating  experiences  of 

exotic  cuisine  and  culture:  Nhiều  trải 

nghiệm thú vị về thực phẩm và văn hóa 

xa lạ 

Word count: 272 

8.  Enhance  tourism  industries:  Phát  triển 

ngành du lịch 

9
3

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
Band 8.0 sample 

Answer 

There have been arguments over the possible impacts that computer 
and  electronic  games  might * on  the  young.  Although  there  is  some 
truth  to  the  belief  that  playing  games  on  computers  and  other 
electronic  devices  enhances  certain  skills,  I  would  side  with  those 
who think playing such games is a waste of time.  

On  the  one  hand,  there  are  several  reasons  why  some  people 
consider video games as a tool to  sharpen some important skills. 
First,  many  games,  such  as  science  or  puzzle  games,  stimulate 
young players’ brains and sensitivity, which gives those players an 
opportunity  to  cultivate  their  creativity  and  problem  solving 
skills.  Second,  people  argue  that  shooting  games,  like  Counter 
Strike,  require  tremendous  focus  and  extremely  fast  reflexes  to 
complete  stages  in  those  games.  With  reflexes  and  concentration 
capability improved, players can demonstrate more effectively daily 
task which specifically require those enhanced skills. 

On the other hand, I would argue that spending time on video games 
is  a  waste  regardless  of  the  possibility  of  skill  development  they 
might offer. Young people are supposed to study properly either at 
school or at home, to which this form of entertainment is a grave 
detriment.  Those  types  of  games  are  fun;  however,  they  are 
addictive at the same time. An excessive amount of time would be 
used  for  games  if  players  are  exposed  to  them  on  a  frequent 
basis. This, consequently, results in the reduction of time for study, 
which  should  be  people’s  top  priority  at  their  age.  Furthermore, 
skills  sharpened  by  computer  and  electronic  games  can  also  be 
acquired by a number of other healthy, educational and less time-
consuming options, such as reading books or participating in sport 
clubs.  

In conclusion, it seems to me that having a few skills enhanced by 
playing video games cannot justify the fact that it is a waste of time. 

Word count: 305 words 

* might inflict

TOPIC: 17-12-2016 

Some  people  think  that  young  people  can 
learn useful skills by playing electronic and 
computer games. Others argue that people 
who  play  electronic  and  computer  games 
are wasting their time.  

Discuss both views and give your opinion. 

Useful vocabulary: 

1. Sharpen  some  important  skills:  Mài 

giũa một số kĩ năng quan trọng 

2. Cultivate their creativity and problem 

solving skills: Phát triển sự sáng tạo và 

khả năng giải quyết vấn đề 

3. Tremendous focus and extremely fast 

reflexes: Sự tập trung cao độ và phản 

xạ cực nhanh 

4. This form of entertainment is a grave 

detriment:  Loại  hình  giải  trí  này  là  sự 

gây hại 

5. Players  are  exposed  to  them  on  a 

frequent  basis:  Người  chơi  tiếp  xúc 

với game thường xuyên  

6. Healthy,  educational  and  less  time-

consuming  options:  Những  sự 

lựa 

chọn  lành  mạnh,  mang  tính  giáo  dục 

và ít tốn thời gian hơn 

0
4

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lời kết 

Các samples này được viết theo 1 format nhất định để mọi người có thể dễ dàng theo dõi. Tất cả ideas cũng 
như từ vựng và cấu trúc câu có thể được tự do copy vào bài khi luyện tập hoặc đi thi thật. Học viên tuyệt đối 
không nên sao chép nguyên văn vì có thể bị Examiners phát hiện và sẽ bị tính điểm 0. 

Đã có rất nhiều học viên (tại Phạm Tiến Dũng hoặc tự học) đã luyện theo các bài mẫu của Phạm Tiến Dũng và đạt kết quả cao, thậm 
chí có những học viên đặc biệt đã đạt 7.5 – 8.0 Writing. Bạn có thể là người tiếp theo đấy.  

Chúc các sĩ tử IELTS học tốt, thi tốt, điểm cao!  

HARD-WORK ALWAYS PAYS OFF 

1
4

e
g
a
P

 
 
 
 
 
Thông tin liên hệ 

Website: http://zim.vn 

Email: cshv@zim.vn 

Hotline: 0903 435 140 – Ms. Mai 

Hà Nội: Tòa Nhà Phạm Tiến Dũng - 130F Thái Thinh, P. Trung Liệt, Q. Đống Đa, Hà Nội 

Tp. HCM: 614-616-618 đường 3/2, P.14, Quận 10, Tp. HCM 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SELF STUDY RESOURCES

Key and Explanation Cambridge IELTS Reading Test – 
Free Download

http://zim.vn

–

The Complete Solution IELTS Writing –  
Free Download

http://zim.vn  
 – 

IELTS Writing Task 2 –  IELTS Simon’s Essay Analysis – 
Free Download

http://zim.vn

–

The Co mplete Solution IELTS Writing 
Premium Version

( 29USD 

49 USD 

–  

99 USD)

– 

 –  

http://zim.vn

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
